
To the Congress of the United States:
In the year just ended, the first decisive steps were taken toward a fundamental reorientation of the role of the Federal Government in our economy—a reorientation that will mean more jobs, more opportunity, and more freedom for all Americans.
This long overdue redirection is designed to foster the energy, creativity, and ambition of the American people so that they can create better lives for themselves, their families, and the communities in which they live.
Equally important, this redirection puts the economy on the path of less inflationary but more rapid economic growth.
My economic program is based on the fundamental precept that government must respect, protect, and enhance the freedom and integrity of the individual.
Economic policy must seek to create a climate that encourages the development of private institutions conducive to individual responsibility and initiative.
People should be encouraged to go about their daily lives with the right and the responsibility for determining their own activities, status, and achievements.
This Report reviews the condition of the American economy as it was inherited by this Administration.
It describes the policies which have been adopted to reverse the debilitating trends of the past, and which will lead to recovery in 1982 and sustained, noninflationary growth in the years to follow.
And, finally, this Report explains the impact these policies will have on the economic well-being of all Americans in the years to come.
The Legacy of the Past
For several decades, an ever-larger role for the Federal Government and, more recently, inflation have sapped the economic vitality of the Nation.
In the 1960s Federal spending averaged 19.5 percent of the Nation’s output.
In the 1970s it rose to 20.9 percent, and in 1980 it reached 22.5 percent.
The burden of tax revenues showed a similar pattern, with increasingly high tax rates stifling individual initiative and distorting the flow of saving and investment.
The substantially expanded role of the Federal Government has been far deeper and broader than even the growing burden of spending, and taxing would suggest.
Over the past decade the government has spun a vast web of regulations that intrude into almost every aspect of every American’s working day.
This regulatory web adversely affects the productivity of our Nation’s businesses, farms, educational institutions, State and local governments, and the operations of the Federal Government itself.
That lessened productivity growth, in turn, increases the costs of the goods and services we buy from each other.
And those regulations raise the cost of government at all levels and the taxes we pay to support it.
Consider also the tragic record of inflation—that unlegislated tax on everyone’s income—which causes high interest rates and discourages saving and investment.
During the 1960s, the average yearly increase in the consumer price index was 2.3 percent.
In the 1970s the rate more than doubled to 7.1 percent; and
in the first year of the 1980s it soared to 13.5 percent.
We simply cannot blame crop failures and oil price increases for our basic inflation problem.
The continuous, underlying cause was poor government policy.
The combination of these two factors—ever higher rates of inflation and ever greater intrusion by the Federal Government into the Nation’s economic life—have played a major part in a fundamental deterioration in the performance of our economy.
In the 1960s productivity in the American economy grew at an annual rate of 2.9 percent;
in the 1970s productivity growth slowed by nearly one-half, to 1.5 percent.
Real gross national product per capita grew at an annual rate of 2.8 percent in the 1960s compared to 2.1 percent in the 1970s.
This deterioration in our economic performance has been accompanied by inadequate growth in employment opportunities for our Nation’s growing work force.
Reversing the trends of the past is not an easy task.
I never thought or stated it would be.
The damage that has been inflicted on our economy was done by imprudent and inappropriate policies over a period of many years;
we cannot realistically expect to undo it all in a few short months.
But during the past year we have made a substantial beginning.
Policies for the 1980s
Upon coming into office, my Administration set out to design and carry out a long-run economic program that would decisively reverse the trends of the past, and make growth and prosperity the norm, rather than the exception for the American economy.
To that end, my first and foremost objective has been to improve the performance of the economy by reducing the role of the Federal Government in all its many dimensions.
This involves a commitment to reduce Federal spending and taxing as a share of gross national product.
It means a commitment to reduce progressively the size of the Federal deficit.
It involves a substantial reform of Federal regulation, eliminating it where possible and simplifying it where appropriate.
It means eschewing the stop-and-go economic policies of the past which, with their short-term focus, only added to our long-run economic ills.
A reduced role for the Federal Government means an enhanced role for State and local governments.
A wide range of Federal activities can be more appropriately and efficiently carried out by the States.
I am proposing in my Budget Message a major shift in this direction.
This shift will eliminate the “freight charge” imposed by the Federal Government on the taxpayers’ money when it is sent to Washington and then doled out again.
It will permit a substantial reduction in Federal employment involved in administering these programs.
Transfers of programs will permit public sector activities to be more closely tailored to the needs and desires of the electorate, bringing taxing and spending decisions closer to the people.
Furthermore, as a result of last year’s Economic Recovery Tax Act, Federal taxation as a share of national income will be substantially reduced, providing States and localities with an expanded tax base so that they can finance those transferred programs they wish to continue.
That tax base will be further increased later in this decade, as Federal excise taxes are phased out.
These initiatives follow some common sense approaches to making government more efficient and responsive:
•
We should leave to private initiative all the functions that individuals can perform privately.
•
We should use the level of government closest to the community involved for all the public functions it can handle.
This principle includes encouraging intergovernmental arrangements among the State and local communities.
•
Federal Government action should be reserved for those needed functions that only the national government can undertake.
The accompanying report from my Council of Economic Advisers develops the basis for these guidelines more fully.
To carry out these policies for the 1980s, my Administration has put into place a series of fundamental and far-reaching changes in Federal Government spending, taxing, and regulatory policy, and we have made clear our support for a monetary policy that will steadily bring down inflation.
Slowing the Growth of Government Spending
Last February I promised to bring a halt to the rapid growth of Federal spending.
To that end, I made budget control the cutting edge of my program for economic recovery.
Thanks to the cooperation of the Congress and the American people, we have taken a major step forward in accomplishing this objective, although much more remains to be done.
The Congress approved rescissions in the fiscal 1981 budget of $12.1 billion, by far the largest amount ever cut from the budget through this procedure.
Spending for fiscal 1982 was subsequently reduced by another $35 billion.
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 also cut $95 billion from the next 2 fiscal years, measured against previous spending trends.
Many of these cuts in so-called “uncontrollable” programs were carried out by substantive changes in authorizing legislation, demonstrating that we can bring government spending under control—if only we have the will.
These spending cuts have been made without damaging the programs that many of our truly needy Americans depend upon.
Indeed, my program will continue to increase the funds, before and after allowing for inflation, that such programs receive in the future.
In this undertaking to bring spending under control, I have made a conscious effort to ensure that the Federal Government fully discharges its duty to provide all Americans with the needed services and protections that only a national government can provide.
Chief among these is a strong national defense, a vital function which had been allowed to deteriorate dangerously in previous years.
As a result of my program, Federal Government spending growth has been cut drastically—from nearly 14 percent annually in the 3 fiscal years ending last September to an estimated 7 percent over the next 3 years—at the same time that we are rebuilding our national defense capabilities.
We must redouble our efforts to control the growth in spending.
We face high, continuing, and troublesome deficits.
Although these deficits are undesirably high, they will not jeopardize the economic recovery.
We must understand the reasons behind the deficits now facing us: recession, lower inflation, and higher interest rates than anticipated.
Although my original timetable for a balanced budget is no longer achievable, the factors which have postponed it do not mean we are abandoning the goal of living within our means.
The appropriate ways to reducing the deficit will be working in our favor in 1982 and beyond: economic growth, lower interest rates, and spending control.
Reducing Tax Burdens
We often hear it said that we work the first few months of the year for the government and then we start to work for ourselves.
But that is backwards.
In fact, the first part of the year we work for ourselves.
We begin working for the government only when our income reaches taxable levels.
After that, the more we earn, the more we work for the government, until rising tax rates on each dollar of extra income discourage many people from further work effort or from further saving and investment.
As a result of passage of the historic Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, we have set in place a fundamental reorientation of our tax laws.
Rather than using the tax system to redistribute existing income, we have significantly restructured it to encourage people to work, save, and invest more.
Across-the-board cuts in individual income tax rates phased-in over 3 years and the indexing of tax brackets in subsequent years will help put an end to making inflation profitable for the Federal Government.
The reduction in marginal rates for all taxpayers, making Individual Retirement Accounts available to all workers, cutting the top tax bracket from 70 percent to 50 percent, and reduction of the “marriage penalty” will have a powerful impact on the incentives for all Americans to work, save, and invest.
These changes are moving us away from a tax system which has encouraged individuals to borrow and spend to one in which saving and investment will be more fully rewarded.
To spur further business investment and productivity growth, the new tax law provides faster write-offs for capital investment and a restructured investment tax credit.
Research and development expenditures are encouraged with a new tax credit.
Small business tax rates have been reduced.
Regulatory Reform
My commitment to regulatory reform was made clear in one of my very first acts in office, when I accelerated the decontrol of crude oil prices and eliminated the cumbersome crude oil entitlements system.
Only skeptics of the free market system are surprised by the results.
For the first time in 10 years, crude oil production in the continental United States has begun to rise.
Prices and availability are now determined by the forces of the market, not dictated by Washington.
And, helped by world supply and demand developments, oil and gasoline prices have been falling, rather than rising.
I have established, by Executive order, a process whereby all executive agency regulatory activity is subject to close and sensitive monitoring by the Executive Office of the President.
During the first year of my Administration, 2,893 regulations have been subjected to Executive Office review.
The number of pages in the Federal Register, the daily publication that contains a record of the Federal Government’s official regulatory actions, has fallen by over one-quarter after increasing steadily for a decade.
But the full impact of this program cannot be found in easy-to-measure actions by the Federal Government.
It is taking place outside of Washington, in large and small businesses, in State and local governments, and in our schools and hospitals where the full benefits of regulatory reform are being felt.
The redirection of work and effort away from trying to cope with or anticipate Federal regulation toward more productive pursuits is how regulatory reform will make its greatest impact in raising productivity and reducing costs.
Controlling Money Growth
Monetary policy is carried out by the independent Federal Reserve System.
I have made clear my support for a policy of gradual and less volatile reduction in the growth of the money supply.
Such a policy will ensure that inflationary pressures will continue to decline without impairing the operation of our financial markets as they mobilize savings and direct them to their most productive uses.
It will also ensure that high interest rates, with their large inflation premiums, will no longer pose a threat to the well-being of our housing and motor vehicle industries, to small business and farmers, and to all who rely upon the use of credit in their daily activities.
In addition, reduced monetary volatility will strengthen confidence in monetary policy and help lower interest rates.
The International Aspects of the Program
The poor performance of the American economy over the past decade and more has had its impact on our position in the world economy.
Concern about the dollar was evidenced by a prolonged period of decline in its value on foreign exchange markets.
A decline in our competitiveness in many world markets reflected, in part, problems of productivity at home.
A strengthened domestic economy will mean a faster growing market for our trading partners and greater competitiveness for American exports abroad.
At the same time it will mean that the dollar should increase in its attractiveness as the primary international trading currency, and thus provide more stability to world trade and finance.
I see an expansion of the international trading system as the chief instrument for economic growth in many of the less developed countries as well as an important factor in our own future and that of the world’s other major industrial nations.
To this end, I reaffirm my Administration’s commitment to free trade.
International cooperation is particularly vital, however, in confronting the challenge of increased protectionism both at home and abroad.
My Administration will work closely with other nations toward reducing trade barriers on an even-handed basis.
I am sensitive to the fact that American domestic economic policies can have significant impacts on our trading partners and on the entire system of world trade and finance.
But it is important for all concerned that the United States pursue economic policies that focus on our long-run problems, and lead to sustained and vigorous growth at home.
In this way the United States will continue to be a constructive force in the world economy.
1981: Building for the Future
In 1981 not only were the far-reaching policies needed for the remainder of the 1980s developed and put into place, their first positive results also began to be felt.
The most significant result was the contribution these policies made to a substantial reduction in inflation, bringing badly needed relief from inflationary pressures to every American.
For example, in 1980 the consumer price index rose 13.5 percent for the year as a whole;
in 1981 that rate of increase was reduced substantially, to 10.4 percent.
This moderation in the rate of price increases meant that inflation, “the cruelest tax,” was taking less away from individual savings and taking less out of every working American’s paycheck.
There are other, more indirect but equally important benefits that flow from a reduction in inflation.
The historically high level of interest rates of recent years was a direct reflection of high rates of actual and expected inflation.
As the events of this past year suggested, only a reduction in inflationary pressures will lead to substantial, lasting reductions in interest rates.
In the 6 months preceding this Administration’s taking office, interest rates had risen rapidly, reflecting excessively fast monetary growth.
Since late last summer, however, short and long-term interest rates have, on average, moved down somewhat in response to anti-inflationary economic policies.
Unfortunately, the high and volatile money growth of the past, and the high inflation and high interest rates which accompanied it, were instrumental in bringing about the poor and highly uneven economic performance of 1980 and 1981, culminating in a sharp fall in output and a rise in unemployment in the latter months of 1981.
This Administration views the current recession with concern.
I am convinced that our policies, now that they are in place, are the appropriate response to our current difficulties and will provide the basis for a vigorous economic recovery this year.
It is of the greatest importance that we avoid a return to the stop-and-go policies of the past.
The private sector works best when the Federal Government intervenes least.
The Federal Government’s task is to construct a sound, stable, long-term framework in which the private sector is the key engine to growth, employment, and rising living standards.
The policies of the past have failed.
They failed because they did not provide the environment in which American energy, entrepreneurship, and talent can best be put to work.
Instead of being a successful promoter of economic growth and individual freedom, government became the enemy of growth and an intruder on individual initiative and freedom.
My program—a careful combination of reducing incentive-stifling taxes, slowing the growth of Federal spending and regulations, and a gradually slowing expansion of the money supply—seeks to create a new environment in which the strengths of America can be put to work for the benefit of us all.
That environment will be an America in which honest work is no longer discouraged by ever-rising prices and tax rates, a country that looks forward to the future not with uncertainty but with the confidence that infused our forefathers.

To the Congress of the United States:
Two years ago, I came to Washington with a deep personal commitment to change America’s economic future.
For more than a decade, the economy had suffered from low productivity growth and a rising rate of inflation.
Government spending absorbed an increasing share of national income.
A shortsighted view of economic priorities was destroying our prospects for long-term prosperity.
The economic program that I proposed shortly after I took office emphasized economic growth and a return to price stability.
My tax proposals were designed to encourage private initiative and to stimulate saving and productive investment.
I have supported and encouraged the Federal Reserve Board in its pursuit of price stability through sound monetary policy.
My Administration has slowed the growth of Federal regulation, strengthening the forces of competition in a number of economic sectors.
And I have worked with the Congress to enact legislation that has reversed or limited the growth of government programs that have become too large or outlasted their usefulness.
Although the full effect of these changes in government policy will take time to develop, some of the benefits have already become apparent.
The rate of consumer price inflation between December 1981 and December 1982 was only 3.9 percent, about one-third of the rate in the year before I took office.
Interest rates are now lower than when I took office, and have fallen rapidly during the last 6 months.
The Administration will propose many additional measures over the next several years to strengthen economic incentives, reduce burdensome regulations, increase capital formation, and raise our standard of living.
It is easy to lose sight of these long-term goals in a year, like 1982, when the economy was in an extended recession.
I am deeply troubled by the current level of unemployment in the United States and by the suffering and anxiety that it entails for millions of Americans.
The unemployment that many of our citizens are experiencing is a consequence of the disinflation that must necessarily follow the accelerating inflation of the last decade.
Allowing the upward trend of inflation to continue would have risked even greater increases in unemployment in the future.
In spite of the present high unemployment rate and the accompanying hardships, it is essential that we maintain the gains against inflation that we have recently achieved at substantial cost.
Continuing success in restraining inflation will provide a stronger foundation for economic recovery in 1983 and beyond.
Reducing Unemployment
The Federal Government can play an important role in reducing unemployment.
I believe, however, that the government should focus its attention on those groups that will continue to face high unemployment rates even after the recovery has begun.
By helping them to develop their job-related skills, we will foster productive careers in the private sector rather than dead-end jobs.
This emphasis on training and private sector employment is the focus of the Jobs Training Partnership Act that I supported and signed into law in 1982.
I am proposing additional steps this year to strengthen Federal training and retraining programs and to help the structurally unemployed find lasting jobs.
It is understandable that many well-meaning members of the Congress have responded to the current high unemployment rate by proposing various public works and employment programs.
However, I am convinced that such programs would only shift unemployment from one industry to another at the cost of increasing the Federal budget deficit.
Although programs to help the structurally unemployed are important, only a balanced and lasting recovery can achieve a substantial reduction in unemployment.
There are now over four million more unemployed people than there were at the peak of the last business cycle.
Nine million new workers are expected to join the labor force by 1988.
Only a healthy and growing economy can provide the more than 13 million jobs needed to achieve a progressively lower level of unemployment over the next 5 years.
The Prospects for Economic Recovery
There are now signs that an economic recovery will begin soon.
By December 1982 the index of leading economic indicators had risen in 7 of the last 8 months.
Housing starts have risen substantially over the last year, and by December 1982 were 39 percent higher than 12 months earlier.
Inventory levels have fallen sharply, so that increased sales should translate quickly into increased production and employment.
Both long-term and short-term interest rates have fallen substantially.
The Administration’s economic forecast predicts that the gross national product will begin to rise in the first quarter of 1983 and will then rise more quickly as the year continues.
Most private forecasters also predict a recovery in 1983.
Monetary policy will play a critical role in achieving a sound and sustainable economic recovery.
If the monetary aggregates grow too slowly, the economy will lack the level of financial resources needed for continued economic growth.
But if these aggregates are allowed to expand too rapidly, an increase in inflation and a short-lived recovery will result.
I recognize the difficulties that the Federal Reserve has faced and will continue to face in guiding the growth of the money supply at a time when major regulatory changes have made it difficult to rely on old guidelines.
I expect that in 1983 the Federal Reserve will expand the money supply at a moderate rate consistent with both a sustained recovery and continued progress against inflation.
Investment and Economic Growth
An economic recovery beginning in 1983 should bring not only a reduction in unemployment but also an increase in business investment over the next several years.
A higher level of investment is an important ingredient in raising productivity and economic growth.
The Accelerated Cost Recovery System that I proposed and that the Congress enacted in 1981 was designed to encourage a substantial expansion of business investment above the relatively low levels of the 1970s.
Since that time the adverse effects of the recession have outweighed the positive effects of the new tax rules.
As the economy turns from recession to recovery, however, incentives to invest will become more powerful.
But business investment may not grow rapidly unless measures proposed by the Administration to reduce potentially large Federal budget deficits are enacted.
Federal borrowing competes with private investment for available savings.
If the government continues to borrow large amounts to finance its deficit, the real interest rate will remain high and discourage private investment.
This process of “crowding out” will tend to depress private investment in the years ahead unless the budget deficit is progressively reduced.
Fiscal Year 1984 Budget Proposals
It is important to distinguish the cyclical part of the budget deficit from the structural part, which would remain even at the peak of the business cycle.
Approximately one-half of the 1983 budget deficit is due to the depressed state of the economy.
With earnings and profits reduced, tax receipts have significantly decreased, and expenditures have increased.
As the economy recovers, the cyclical part of the deficit will shrink.
But cyclical recovery alone will not bring the deficit down to an acceptable size.
In the budget I am now submitting to the Congress, I am proposing the dramatic steps needed to reduce Federal budget deficits in future years.
My budget proposals are designed to reduce the deficit by dealing directly with the rapid growth of the domestic spending programs (apart from interest payments) of the Federal Government.
In 1970 these programs accounted for 10 percent of the gross national product and 48 percent of Federal spending.
By 1980 these programs had grown to 14 percent of gross national product and 63 percent of the budget.
I remain committed to the idea that we can reduce budget deficits without increasing the burden on the poor, without weakening our national defense, and without destroying economic incentives by counterproductive tax increases.
Rapid congressional enactment of the budget would provide clear and credible evidence that the Federal Government intends not to place heavy burdens on the capital markets in future years.
Such reassurance should hasten the decline in interest rates, especially long-term interest rates on bonds and residential mortgages, and improve prospects for the recovery of the housing, automobile, and capital investment sectors of the economy.
I recognize the special importance of protecting the social security and medicare programs for aged retirees and their dependents.
These programs now face very serious financial problems.
The bipartisan National Commission on Social Security Reform has recently recommended a series of measures, which I have endorsed, to eliminate the cumulative deficiency of $150 billion to $200 billion projected for the social security system in the years 1983 through 1989.
It is critically important at this time to make changes in the social security programs that will protect their solvency and financial viability for the years to come.
The Remaining Burden of Federal Economic Regulation
For many decades, the Federal Government has regulated the price and entry conditions affecting several sectors of the American economy.
Much of this regulation is no longer appropriate to the conditions of the contemporary economy.
Over time, most of this regulation—by restraining competition and the development of new services and technologies—has not served the interests of either consumers or producers.
Since deregulation of some markets began several years ago, the experience has been almost uniformly encouraging.
My Administration has supported these step-by-step efforts to reduce these regulations in markets that would otherwise be competitive.
It is now time to consider broad measures to eliminate many of these economic regulations especially as they affect the natural gas, transportation, communications, and financial markets.
Interest Rates and the U.S. Trade Deficit
The very high levels of real interest rates over the last several years are a principal cause of the sharp rise in the exchange value of the dollar relative to foreign currencies.
This rise has reduced the ability of American exporters to compete in foreign markets and increased the competitiveness of imports in the domestic market.
Largely as a result, the U.S. merchandise trade balance showed a substantial deficit in 1982.
Our current trade deficit is a reminder of the importance of international trade to the American economy.
The export share of U.S. gross national product has more than doubled over the last three decades.
American workers, businesses, and farmers suffer when foreign governments prevent American products from entering their markets, thus reducing U.S. export levels.
While the United States may be forced to respond to the trade distorting practices of foreign governments through the use of strategic measures, such practices do not warrant indiscriminate protectionist actions, such as domestic content rules for automobiles sold in the United States.
Widespread protectionist policies would hurt American consumers by raising prices of the products they buy, and by removing some of the pressures for cost control and quality improvement that result from international competition.
Moreover, protectionism at home could hurt the workers, farmers, and firms in the United States that produce goods and services for export, since it would almost inevitably lead to increased protectionism by governments abroad.
I am committed to a policy of preventing the enactment of protectionist measures in the United States, and I will continue working to persuade the other nations of the world to eliminate trade distorting practices that threaten the viability of the international trading system upon which world prosperity depends.
Trade in goods and services is only one aspect of our economic relations with the rest of the world.
The international flow of capital into the United States and from the United States to other countries is also of great importance.
The United States should play a primary role in preserving the vitality of the international capital market.
Severe strains on that market developed in 1982 as several nations found it difficult to service their overseas debt obligations.
In 1982, the Federal Government worked closely with debtor and creditor nations and the major international lending agencies to prevent a disruption in the functioning of world capital markets.
Now, with the cooperation of a wide variety of creditors, countries with especially severe debt-servicing difficulties are establishing economic and financial programs that will permit them to meet their international obligations.
The Years Ahead
We are now at a critical juncture for the American economy.
The recession has led to strong pressures from some members of the Congress and from others to abandon our commitment to a policy that is aimed at long-term economic growth, capital accumulation, and price stability.
There are many who urge new government spending programs and forcing the Federal Reserve to raise monetary growth rates to levels that would rekindle inflation.
I am convinced that such policies would prove detrimental to the long-run interests of the American people.
Our economy, despite the recession, is extraordinarily resilient and is now on the road to a healthy recovery.
It is essential in the year ahead that the Administration and the Congress work together, take a long-term perspective, and pursue economic policies that lead to sustained economic growth and to greater prosperity for all Americans.

To the Congress of the United States:
I have long believed that the vitality of the American economy and the prosperity of the American people have been diminished by inappropriate policies of the Federal Government:
unnecessary government regulations that discouraged initiative and wasted scarce capital and labor;
an inefficient and unfair tax system that penalized effort, saving, and investment;
excessive government spending that wasted taxpayers’ money, misused our Nation’s resources, and created budget deficits that reduced capital formation and added to the burden of the national debt; and
monetary policies that produced frequent business cycles and a path of increasing inflation.
I came to Washington to change these policies.
The needed reforms are far from complete, but substantial progress can already be seen:
the burden of regulation has been reduced,
tax rates have been lowered and the tax structure improved,
government spending on a wide range of domestic programs has been curtailed, and
a sound monetary policy has been established.
Although the full favorable effect of those reforms on our Nation’s rate of economic growth will take time to develop, some of the benefit of our economic policies is already visible in the current recovery.
The economy’s performance in 1983 was very gratifying to me.
The 3.2 percent rise in consumer prices between 1982 and 1983 was the lowest rate of inflation since 1967.
The recovery produced a sharp drop in unemployment and a substantial increase in the income of American families.
The number of people at work increased by more than 4 million and the unemployment rate fell from a high of 10.7 percent in December 1982 to 8.2 percent in December 1983.
The 6.1 percent rise in real gross national product (GNP) last year means that real annual income per person in the United States rose $700.
Reducing Unemployment
Despite the substantial reduction in unemployment, the number of unemployed workers remains unacceptably high.
Continued economic recovery will mean millions of additional jobs in the years ahead and further declines in the rate of unemployment.
In 1984 alone, the American economy is expected to add more than 3 million additional jobs.
By the end of the decade, we will need 16 million new jobs to absorb a growing labor force.
Only a strong and expanding economy can provide those jobs while achieving a progressively lower level of unemployment over the next 6 years.
Although economic growth is by far the most important way to reduce unemployment, special policies to help the structurally unemployed and particularly disadvantaged groups can also be helpful.
To assist these individuals in developing job-related skills that will lead to productive careers in the private sector, I proposed the Job Training Partnership Act that I signed into law in 1982.
Last year I proposed additional measures to increase opportunities for training and retraining.
Although the Congress has enacted some of my employment proposals, I am still waiting for congressional action on others.
Of particular concern to me is the unemployment among teenagers.
Such unemployment is not only a problem in itself, but is also indicative of lost opportunities to acquire on-the-job training and job-related skills.
It is widely recognized that the minimum wage law is a substantial barrier to the employment of teenagers, especially minority teenagers.
I have proposed that during the summer months the minimum wage for teenagers be reduced to 75 percent of the regular minimum wage.
This reform would give many teenagers the opportunity to get a first job and acquire the skills needed to help them with subsequent employment and would not hurt adult employment.
With an unemployment rate of nearly 50 percent among black teenagers and with only about 20 percent of black teenagers employed, we must act.
The Federal Government must not be the source of barriers to employment.
Inflation and Monetary Policy
Reducing the rate of inflation was my most immediate economic goal when I arrived in Washington.
In the preceding 24 months, the consumer price level had increased more than 27 percent.
Many people feared the U.S. Government had lost its ability to control inflation.
Until inflation was brought under control, a healthy recovery could not get under way.
The inflation rate has declined dramatically over the past 3 years.
Between 1982 and 1983, the consumer price index rose only 3.2 percent.
Americans can again have confidence in the value of the dollar, and they can save for the future without fearing that the purchasing power of these savings will be destroyed by inflation.
I am firmly committed to keeping inflation on a downward path.
We must never relax in our pursuit of price stability.
The basic requirement for a continued moderation of inflation is a sound monetary policy.
I continue to support the Federal Reserve in its pursuit of price stability through sound monetary policy.
Last year was a particularly difficult time for monetary policy because of the substantial changes in financial regulations.
I am pleased that, in spite of these difficulties, the monetary aggregates at the end of the year were within their target ranges.
I expect that in 1984 the Federal Reserve will expand the money stock at a moderate rate that is consistent with both a sustained recovery and continuing progress against inflation.
There are those who advocate a fast rate of money growth in an attempt to depress interest rates.
Experience shows, however, that rapid money growth inevitably leads to an increased rate of inflation and higher interest rates.
The only monetary policy that can bring interest rates down, and keep them down, is one that promotes confidence that inflation will continue to decline in the years ahead.
The Dollar and the Trade Deficit
The high interest rates in the United States and our low rate of inflation continue to make dollar securities an appealing investment for individuals and businesses around the world.
In addition, the United States has been an attractive place for stock market investment and for direct business investment.
The result has been a continued rise in the dollar’s exchange value relative to other currencies of the world.
The sharp rise in the value of the dollar since 1980 has made it cheaper for Americans to purchase products from overseas, thereby helping us fight inflation.
But the dollar’s sharp rise has made it difficult for American businesses and farmers to compete in world markets.
The decline in U.S. exports and the substantial rise in our imports has resulted in record trade deficits in 1982 and 1983.
The trade deficit has been temporarily exacerbated by the international debt problems and by the more advanced stage of recovery in the United States than in the world at large.
Despite these problems, I remain committed to the principle of free trade as the best way to bring the benefits of competition to American consumers and businesses.
It would be totally inappropriate to respond by erecting trade barriers or by using taxpayers’ dollars to subsidize exports.
Instead, we must work with the other nations of the world to reduce the export subsidies and import barriers that currently hurt U.S. farmers, businesses, and workers.
I am also firmly opposed to any attempt to depress the dollar’s exchange value by intervention in international currency markets.
Pure exchange market intervention cannot offset the fundamental factors that determine the dollar’s value.
Intervention in the foreign exchange market would be an exercise in futility that would probably enrich currency speculators at the expense of American taxpayers.
A combination of exchange market intervention and expansionary monetary policy could reduce the dollar’s exchange value, but only by causing an unacceptable increase in the rate of inflation.
The dollar must therefore be allowed to seek its natural value without exchange market intervention.
Regulation
One of the four key elements of my program for economic recovery is a far-reaching program of regulatory relief.
Substantial progress has been made during the last 3 years.
The growth of new regulations has been reduced by more than a third.
The demands on the private sector of government paperwork have been reduced by several hundred million hours a year.
The Congress approved legislation that has led to substantial deregulation of financial markets and intercity bus transportation.
The Federal Communications Commission, with our support, has reduced the regulation of broadcasting and of new communications technology, and the Interstate Commerce Commission and the Civil Aeronautics Board have gone far down the path of deregulation of competitive transportation markets.
The benefits of these and other deregulation measures are now increasingly apparent to American consumers and businesses.
It is also apparent that substantial further deregulation and regulatory reform will require changes in the basic regulatory legislation.
I urge the Congress to act on the several measures that I proposed last year on natural gas decontrol, financial deregulation, and reform of private pension regulation.
I remain confident that there is a basis for agreement on measures that would reduce the burden of Federal regulations, while protecting our shared values and not jeopardizing safety.
Tax Reforms
The final installment of the 3-year personal tax cut took effect in July, giving a helpful boost to the economic recovery.
The income tax rate at each income level has been reduced by about 25 percent since 1980.
In 1984 a median income four-person family will pay about $1,100 less than it would have without these tax reductions.
And, beginning in 1985, the tax brackets will be adjusted automatically so that inflation will no longer push taxpayers into higher brackets and increase the share of their income taken in taxes.
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 went beyond reducing tax rates to establish important reforms in the structure of the tax system.
For businesses, the Accelerated Cost Recovery System increased the after-tax profitability of investments in plant and equipment.
The sharp fall in inflation has also increased after-tax profitability.
As a result, investment in business equipment has recently been quite strong despite the high real interest rates.
For individuals, the Economic Recovery Tax Act reduced the marriage tax penalty, the estate tax burden, and tax discrimination against saving.
The response to the universal eligibility of Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) has been far greater than was originally expected.
It is estimated that more than 15 million individuals now use IRAs to save for their retirement.
Last year, I proposed to expand the opportunity for all married couples to use IRAs fully by allowing them to contribute up to $2,000 each per year to an IRA even if only one has wage income.
Further improvement and simplification of our tax system are sorely needed.
The burden of taxation depends not only on the quantity of tax revenue that is collected but also on the quality of the tax system.
I have asked the Secretary of the Treasury to develop a plan of action with specific recommendations to make our tax system fairer, simpler, and less of a burden on our Nation’s economy.
By broadening the tax base, personal tax rates could come down, not go up.
Our tax system would stimulate greater economic growth and provide more revenue.
Government Spending
One of my principal goals when I came to Washington was to reverse the dramatic growth of Federal spending on domestic programs and to shift more resources to our Nation’s defense.
Although many doubted this could be done, both goals are being achieved.
We must do everything that we can to avoid waste in defense as in other areas of government.
But we must also be willing to pay the cost of providing the military capability to defend our country and to meet our responsibilities as the leading Nation of the free world.
Outlays for defense had declined to only 5.2 percent of GNP in 1980, less than one-fourth of total government outlays.
By the current fiscal year, defense outlays have increased to 6.7 percent of GNP and 28 percent of total outlays.
Real defense outlays have grown 39 percent since 1980.
Our spending on defense, however, remains a far smaller percentage of our national income than it was in 1960, when defense outlays took 9.7 percent of GNP.
Real spending has been cut on a wide range of domestic programs and activities.
Many wasteful bureaucratic activities have been eliminated and the number of nondefense employees on the Federal payroll has been reduced by 71,000.
We have examined every area of Federal Government spending, and sought to eliminate unnecessary and wasteful spending while protecting the benefits needed by the poor and the aged.
As a result, total nondefense spending now takes a smaller share of our GNP than it did in 1980.
Moreover, under present law, nondefense spending will continue to take a declining share of our GNP in the years ahead.
This reduction has been accomplished without any decrease in existing social security benefits or any change in the medicare benefits for the elderly.
Spending on all other nondefense activities and programs has actually declined over 12 percent in real terms since 1980.
Even with no further reductions in these activities and programs, their share of GNP in 1986 will be nearly back to the level of 1965.
I am committed to continuing the search for ways to reduce government spending.
The budget that I am submitting to the Congress identifies significant savings in entitlement programs and reductions in outlays for other programs that are excessive or that are not the proper responsibility of the Federal Government.
The Grace Commission has given us some 2500 ways to reduce wasteful spending that could save billions of dollars in the years ahead.
Budget Deficits
I have long believed that our Nation’s budget must be balanced.
A pattern of overspending by the Federal Government has produced a deficit in 22 of the last 23 years.
My most serious economic disappointment in 1983 was therefore the failure of the Congress to enact the deficit reduction proposals that I submitted last January in my budget for fiscal 1984.
We would be much closer to a balanced budget today if the Congress had enacted all of the spending cuts that I have requested since assuming office, and if the long recession and the sharp decline in inflation had not substantially reduced real tax revenue.
In last year’s budget I proposed changes in outlays and revenues that could put the deficit on a sharply declining path that, by 1988, would have been less than 2 percent of GNP and on its way to a balance of revenues and outlays.
The unwillingness of the Congress to accept the proposals that I offered has made it clear to me that we must wait until after this year’s election to enact spending reductions coupled with tax simplification that will eventually eliminate our budget deficit.
But we cannot delay until 1985 to start reducing the deficits that are threatening to prevent a sustained and healthy recovery.
I have therefore called on the Democratic and Republican leaders in the Congress to designate representatives to work with the Administration on the development of a “downpayment” deficit reduction program.
I believe that this bipartisan group could develop a package that could be enacted this spring which would reduce the deficit by about $100 billion over the next 3 fiscal years.
The package could include a number of the less contentious spending cuts that are pending before the Congress plus additional outlay savings based on the proposals of the Grace Commission.
Additional revenue could be provided by measures to close certain tax loopholes—measures that the Department of the Treasury has previously said are worthy of support.
These deficit reductions can increase the public’s confidence in our economic future and their faith in the ability of the political system to deal satisfactorily with the deficit.
The downpayment package can be a first step toward full elimination of the remaining deficits.
Even with a 3-year $100 billion package, the deficits projected for fiscal 1986 and beyond are totally unacceptable to me.
They would be a serious threat to our Nation’s economic health and a heavy burden to future generations.
I am committed to finding ways to reduce further the growth of spending and to put the budget on a path that will lead to a balance between outlays and receipts.
In 1985 I will submit a budget that can achieve this goal.
But we must go further and make basic structural reforms in the budgetary process—including the line-item veto and the balanced budget amendment—that will keep spending under control and prevent deficits in the future.
Looking Ahead
As I look ahead, I am very optimistic about the prospects for the American economy.
Substantial progress has been made in reforming the economic policies that will shape our economic future.
If we continue to develop and pursue sound policies, our Nation can achieve a long period of strong economic growth with low inflation, and the American people can enjoy unprecedented prosperity and economic security.

To the Congress of the United States:
In 1981, when I first assumed the duties of the Presidency, our Nation was suffering from declining productivity and the highest inflation in the postwar period—the legacy of years of government overspending, overtaxing, and overregulation.
We bent all of our efforts to correct these problems, not by unsustainable short-run measures, but by measures that would increase long-term growth without renewed inflation.
We removed unnecessary regulations, cut taxes, and slowed the growth of Federal spending, freeing the private sector to develop markets, create jobs, and increase productivity.
With conviction in our principles, with patience and hard work, we restored the economy to a condition of healthy growth without substantial inflation.
Although employment is now rising, business opportunities are expanding, and interest rates and inflation are under control, we cannot relax our economic vigilance.
A return to the policies of excessive government spending and control that led to the economic “malaise” of the late seventies would quickly draw us back into that same disastrous pattern of inflation and recession.
Now is the time to recommit ourselves to the policies that broke that awful pattern: policies of reduced Federal spending, lower tax rates, and less regulation to free the creative energy of our people and lead us to an even better economic future through strong and sustained economic growth.
Major Economic Developments 1981–1984
The Program for Economic Recovery that we initiated in February 1981 had four key elements:
•
Budget reform to cut the rate of growth in Federal spending,
•
Reductions in personal and business taxes,
•
A far-reaching program of regulatory relief, and
•
Restoration of a stable currency and a healthy financial market through sound monetary policy.
The success of this program is now obvious—the U.S. economy is experiencing the strongest recovery in 30 years:
•
Real business fixed investment in plant and equipment is higher, relative to real gross national product, than at any time in the postwar period.
•
Productivity growth in the business sector has averaged 2.2 percent since the fourth quarter of 1980, compared with a rate of less than 0.3 percent over the prior 4 years.
•
The inflation rate is now about one-third the rate in 1980, and short-term interest rates are less than one-half their peak 1981 levels.
But the quantitative record alone does not tell the full story.
Four years ago, there was a widespread and growing anxiety about the economy.
Many thought that the Nation had entered a condition of permanent economic decline, and that we would have to live with permanent double-digit inflation unless we were willing to suffer massive long-term unemployment.
We did not share this pessimism.
It was clear to us that the Nation’s economic problems were not the product of the economic system, but of the onerous influence of government on that system.
The creative potential of the American people, choosing their own economic futures, was more constrained than helped by the increasingly heavy hand of government.
Nor did we share the negative views
that a reduction of inflation would increase long-term unemployment;
that economic growth, by itself, would increase inflation; and
that the government had to protect a “fragile” market system by regulating oil prices and interest rates.
The primary economic responsibility of the Federal Government is not to make choices for people, but to provide an environment in which people can make their own choices.
The performance of the economy in the past 2 years under our Program for Economic Recovery fully justifies our faith in the Nation’s basic economic health.
In 1983 and 1984 the economy generated about 300,000 new jobs per month without an increase in inflation.
Real gross national product increased 5.6 percent during 1984, and the unemployment rate declined from 8.1 percent to 7.1 percent.
Inflation was steady at its lowest level in more than a decade, and most interest rates are now lower than a year ago.
Yet while the U.S. economy grew rapidly in 1984, it maintains the potential for continued strong growth.
The inventory/sales ratio is low by historical standards, and capacity utilization rates in most industries are well below prior peak rates.
Economic conditions in 1984 were more favorable than during the second year of a typical recovery, and we see none of the warning signs that usually precede the end of an expansion.
The temporary slowing of economic growth starting in July—reflecting the combination of a minor adjustment of consumer spending and inventories and little growth of the basic money supply—seems to have ended in November.
These conditions, plus an expectation that the Federal Reserve System will maintain sufficient money growth, support our forecast that the present recovery will continue.
The thriving venture capital market is financing a new American revolution of entrepreneurship and technological change.
The American economy is once again the envy of the world.
The Economic Outlook
For the years 1985 through 1988, we assume real gross national product growth of 4 percent per year, slowing slightly in 1989–90.
We know that economic recoveries have not been stable in either duration or magnitude, in part because monetary and fiscal policies have often been erratic.
We may not be able to eliminate recessions entirely, but a sustained commitment to policies that promote long-term growth and stability can reduce their frequency and severity.
Our forecast that the unemployment rate, the inflation rate, and interest rates will decline gradually in the years ahead reflects this commitment to sound, sustainable, and predictable policies.
The Task Ahead: A Program for Growth and Opportunity
Our 1981 Program for Economic Recovery was designed for the long run with priority attention to the major problems we faced at that time.
Our second-term Program for Growth and Opportunity represents a continuation and expansion of the earlier program, with priority attention to the major problems we face in 1985 and beyond.
Our objectives—economic growth, stability of the general price level, and increased individual economic opportunity—have not changed.
Federal economic policy will continue to be guided by the four key elements of the earlier program.
Our progress in solving the most important economic problems we inherited in 1981, however, has allowed us to refocus our attention on the remaining problems and to shift our priorities and resources toward their solution.
Several significant problems remain to be addressed.
The rate of growth of Federal spending has been substantially reduced from the rate projected in the budget we inherited in fiscal 1981, but spending growth continues to outpace the economy.
Spending too much has left us with a large budget deficit that must and will be reduced.
In our efforts to reduce the deficit, we must not forget that the cause of the deficit is increased spending and insufficient growth, not decreased taxes.
Federal tax receipts are now almost the same share of gross national product as in the late 1970s, even after the substantial reduction in tax rates that we initiated in 1981.
Another economic problem demanding resolution is unemployment and its effects on the Nation’s workers and families.
Despite significant progress, much remains to be done.
More than 6 million more Americans are now employed than in January 1981, but the unemployment rate is still too high.
We will not be satisfied until every American who wants a job is employed at a wage that reflects the market value of his or her skills.
Another aspect of this problem is that the poverty rate remains stubbornly high, despite a strong recovery and a continued increase in government assistance.
Also, although the inflation rate has been reduced substantially, it is still higher than during most of our peacetime history prior to 1965.
We will not be satisfied until we have totally and permanently wrung inflation out of our economy.
Work also remains to be done in the areas of regulatory and monetary policy.
Many Federal regulations still impose a substantial cost to the economy.
In addition, we need to strengthen the commitment to a sound monetary policy that never again retards economic growth, or reaccelerates inflation.
Our trade deficit, another area of concern, has been caused in large part by a strong dollar.
Investors around the world have bid up the dollar as they have become increasingly confident in our economy.
That confidence is an asset and not a liability.
However, the conditions that have led to the trade deficit have increased the obstacles faced by some important industries.
Agriculture, one of our most productive export sectors, has been harmed by a combination of rigid and outdated Federal agricultural policies and subsidized foreign competition as well as by the strong dollar.
Some of our import-competing industries, such as steel, have also been hurt by subsidized foreign competition and the strong dollar.
In one respect the trade deficit is like the budget deficit;
both are too large to be sustained, but there are both beneficial and detrimental ways to reduce them.
Our goal is a system of free and fair trade in goods, services, and capital.
We will work toward this goal through both bilateral and multilateral agreements.
Economic conditions during the past 4 years are best characterized as transitional—
from a period of low productivity growth to a period of high productivity growth;
from a period of high inflation and interest rates to a period of much lower inflation and interest rates;
from a period of economic “malaise” to a period of economic opportunity.
Our task is to consolidate and extend these gains.
Federal Spending and the Deficit
The rate of growth of Federal spending has been reduced from 14.8 percent in fiscal 1981 to an average rate of 9.1 percent in fiscal years 1982 through 1985.
During this period, however, current dollar gross national product has increased at an average rate of 7.6 percent.
The continued growth of the Federal spending share of gross national product and lost revenues from the recession are the main reasons we are now faced with such large Federal deficits.
The projected Federal deficits are much too large, and they must be reduced.
As explained in the accompanying report, however, the economic consequences of reducing these deficits depend critically on how they are reduced.
A sustained reduction of the growth of Federal spending will contribute to economic growth, while an increase in tax rates would constrain economic growth.
Federal spending on many programs is far larger than necessary, and far larger than desired by most Americans.
My fiscal 1986 budget proposal will protect the social safety net and essential programs, such as defense, for which the Federal Government has a clear constitutional responsibility, and will reform or eliminate many programs that have proven ineffective or nonessential.
With no resort to a tax increase, this budget will reduce the deficit to about 4 percent of gross national product in fiscal 1986 and to a steadily lower percentage in future years.
Additional spending reductions will probably be necessary in future years to achieve a balanced budget by the end of the decade.
The problems of excessive spending and deficits are not new.
In the absence of fundamental reform, they may recur again and again in the future.
I therefore support two important measures—one to authorize the President to veto individual line items in comprehensive spending bills, and another to constrain the Federal authority to borrow or to increase spending in the absence of broad congressional support.
These structural changes are not substitutes for the hard fiscal choices that will be necessary in 1985 and beyond, nor for the need to simplify our tax system to stimulate greater growth; but
they are important to provide the mechanisms and discipline for longer term fiscal health.
The case for a line-item veto should by now be obvious.
The Governors of 43 States have used this authority effectively, and such authority has only once been withdrawn, only later to be reinstated.
For over a century, Presidents of both parties have requested such authority.
The proposed constitutional amendment providing for a balanced budget and a tax limitation would constrain the long-run growth of Federal spending and the national debt.
In 1982 a proposed amendment to constrain Federal authority to spend and borrow was approved by more than two-thirds of the Senate and by more than a majority of the House of Representatives;
a balanced budget amendment has also been endorsed by the legislatures of 32 States.
Approval of the proposed balanced budget/tax limitation amendment would ensure that fiscal decisions by future Presidents and Members of Congress are more responsive to the broad interests of the American population.
Federal Taxation
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 was one of the most important accomplishments of my first term.
Individual income tax rates were reduced nearly 25 percent, effective tax rates on the income from new investment were substantially reduced, and beginning this year tax brackets are adjusted for inflation.
But more needs to be done.
Personal tax rates should be reduced further to encourage stronger economic growth which, in itself, is our best tool for putting deficits on a steady downward path.
Our tax system needs basic reform.
It is extraordinarily complicated;
it leads to substantial economic inefficiency; and
it is widely perceived to be unfair.
At my request, the Treasury Department has developed a comprehensive proposal to simplify and reform the Federal tax system, one that for expected economic conditions would yield about the same revenues as the present system.
This proposal, by substantially broadening the tax base, would permit a significant further reduction of marginal tax rates.
Shortly, I will be submitting my own proposal for tax simplification, and will urge the Congress to give serious sustained attention to tax simplification—in order to enact a program that will increase fairness and stimulate future savings, investment, and growth.
Federal Regulation
We have made major efforts in the past 4 years to reduce and eliminate Federal regulation of economic activity.
Executive Office review of new regulations was streamlined.
Oil prices were deregulated by Executive authority early in 1981.
New legislation was approved to reduce regulation of banking and to largely eliminate regulation of interstate bus travel.
Regulatory reform, however, has been painfully slow.
The Congress failed to approve our proposals to further deregulate banking and natural gas prices, and to reform the regulation of private pensions.
In addition, the reauthorization of several major environmental laws has been delayed for several years.
I urge the Congress to consider further deregulation efforts in several areas.
The experience with deregulation of oil prices makes clear that continued regulation of natural gas prices is not appropriate.
Reform of nuclear licensing requirements also deserves attention.
Further deregulation of the banking system should be paired with a major reform of the deposit insurance systems.
Some changes in the single-employer pension law and an increased premium are necessary to preserve the pension insurance system.
We should also seriously consider eliminating the remaining Federal regulation of trucking and railroads.
Finally, I remain hopeful that the Administration and the Congress can work together to reauthorize the major environmental laws in a way that serves our common environmental and economic goals.
Monetary Policy
The Constitution authorizes the Congress “To coin Money (and) regulate the Value thereof,” and Congress has delegated this authority to the Federal Reserve System.
The role of the executive branch is restricted to advising the Congress and the Federal Reserve about the conduct of monetary policy, and to nominating members of the Board of Governors as positions become vacant.
During my first term, the Federal Reserve reduced the rate of money growth relative to the high rates of the late 1970s.
This change in policy, assisted by the related strong increase in the exchange value of the dollar, helped produce a substantial reduction of inflation and market interest rates.
On occasion, however, the rate of money growth has been quite volatile, contributing to instability in interest rates and a decline in economic activity.
The sharp reduction in money growth through mid-1982, for example, undoubtedly added to the length and severity of the 1981–1982 recession.
And a similar reduction in money growth in the second half of 1984 contributed to the temporary slowing of economic growth late in the year.
We reaffirm our support for a sound monetary policy that contributes to strong, steady economic growth and price stability.
Moreover, we expect to cooperate closely with the Federal Reserve in defining and carrying out a prudent and predictable monetary policy.
Conclusion
The Federal Government has only a few important economic responsibilities.
Given a proper conduct of these important roles, additional Federal intervention is more often a part of the problem than a part of the solution.
We should continue to reduce the many less-important economic activities of the Federal Government so that individuals, private institutions, and State and local governments will have more resources and more freedom to pursue their own interests.
Good stewardship of our constitutional responsibilities and the creative energies of the American people will ensure a future of continued economic growth and opportunity.

TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:
The major economic objectives of my Administration from its beginning have been strong, sustainable, noninflationary economic growth and expanding economic opportunities for all Americans.
To achieve these goals, we have pursued policies that are in the long-term best interest of the Nation.
The benefits of this approach are now clear.
The economy has entered the fourth year of a robust expansion that has dramatically increased opportunities for all Americans.
Millions of new jobs have been created.
Investment opportunities have increased.
Standards of living have risen.
Moreover, this success has been accomplished without rekindling inflation.
We are committed to continuing and extending policies that encourage the private investment and innovation that are the foundation of this expansion.
We continue to resist unnecessary increases in government spending and unwarranted interference in private markets.
Sustained, strong economic growth depends critically on allowing the market system to function as freely as possible.
Free markets provide proper incentives to work, save, and invest, and they ensure that the interests of consumers are served.
These basic principles were embodied in our 1981 Program for Economic Recovery and reaffirmed in the second-term Program for Growth and Opportunity.
These programs do not offer “quick fixes” but rely on the inherent ability of the free market system to allocate resources efficiently and to generate economic prosperity.
The fundamental responsibility of the Federal Government should be to provide a stable environment within which people can make economic decisions, not to make those decisions for them.
To this end, our initial program involved four essential elements:
•
Restrain the growth of Federal spending,
•
Reduce personal and business taxes,
•
Reduce regulatory excesses, and
•
Encourage stable and moderate monetary growth.
THE CURRENT EXPANSION
The success of our policies is now apparent.
Even though economic growth slowed a bit in 1985 compared with its strong performance in 1983 and 1984, the expansion has nonetheless proceeded at an encouraging pace.
It is already 4 months longer in duration than the average peacetime expansion since World War II.
If the expansion continues as expected throughout 1986, it will be the third longest in the postwar period.
This expansion has been characterized by unusually strong real business investment in plant and equipment due to our successful attack on inflation and to our tax policy, which stimulated investment.
Real business investment has contributed nearly twice as much to real gross national product (GNP) growth in this expansion as it typically has in previous postwar expansions;
as a share of real GNP, it is higher than at any other time in the postwar period.
Stronger U.S. investment means not only a stronger economy today, but also higher productivity and the potential for faster growth in the future.
Strong employment growth is another outstanding feature of this recovery.
Since the end of the last recession in November 1982, the U.S. economy has employed more than 9 million new workers.
Furthermore, the unemployment rate fell from 10.6 percent in November 1982 to 6.9 percent in December 1985.
Despite this dramatic improvement, however, we will not be satisfied until all American workers can find jobs at wages commensurate with their skills.
When we initiated our Program for Economic Recovery, we were confident that a resourceful, flexible economy, unencumbered by excessive governmental intervention, would create jobs.
At the same time, we believed that restrained monetary growth would reduce inflation.
Our optimism was justified.
The rate of inflation is now less than one-third of the rate in 1980.
During this expansion, inflation has maintained its lowest level in more than a decade despite the tremendous employment growth that the economy has generated.
Reflecting in part the reduction in inflation, interest rates—especially long-term rates—have declined throughout 1985 and by the end of the year were at their lowest levels in 6 years.
Our success in reducing inflation came as a surprise to some.
As inflation rose in the 1970s, some businesses and individuals incurred debt in order to purchase assets, expecting the income generated by these assets to rise with inflation while the real burden of servicing the debt decreased.
With the decline in inflation, the real burden of debt servicing rose and the income generated by many assets fell.
This combination of events has strained some U.S. financial institutions.
Falling farm incomes have hampered the ability of some farmers to pay interest on their debt.
Similarly, many less developed countries have had difficulty repaying loans from U.S. financial institutions.
The stress that the undesirable rise in inflation and its desirable but unexpectedly rapid decline have imposed on the U.S. financial system emphasizes the importance of achieving and maintaining long-term price stability.
America’s optimism concerning continued growth in economic opportunities is shared by businesses and individuals throughout the world.
The United States has been and remains one of the few major immigrant-receiving countries, reflecting in part the economy’s ability to generate economic opportunities.
During the current expansion, profitable investment opportunities in the United States have also attracted foreign capital, helping to finance the rapid growth in investment.
The inflow of foreign capital indicates a strong economy.
As other nations continue to move toward market-oriented policies and reduce excessive government spending, taxation, and structural rigidities, they too will generate increased investment opportunities, resulting in increased growth and stronger currencies as more capital flows into their economies.
THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Many factors point to continuation of the current expansion.
Economic conditions at the end of 1985 were more favorable than they were at the beginning of the year and are expected to improve further.
Monetary growth during the past year has been sufficient to accommodate growth in the economy.
The leading economic indicators have risen in 11 of the past 12 months.
Inventories are relatively low, and as sales continue to expand, production should increase to replenish depleted inventories.
Interest rates have continued their decline, promising to spur additional capital spending.
Furthermore, the warning signals that typically precede the end of expansions have not been observed.
Thus, we feel confident that the current expansion will continue through 1986.
We expect increased growth in real GNP of 4 percent in 1986, continuing throughout 1987 and 1988 and declining gradually in 1989–91 as the economy approaches its long-run real growth trend.
Given the monetary and exchange rate developments during the past year, we anticipate a slight rise in inflation in 1986–87.
However, if the Federal Reserve reaffirms its resolve to achieve price stability, a goal that I support without reservation, the downturn in inflation should resume in later years.
Changing events, including erratic monetary and fiscal policies, can bring any expansion to an abrupt and unexpected halt.
Our projections for the longer term are premised on the assumption that stable economic policies will foster continued economic growth and will also provide the needed flexibility for the economy to respond to external disturbances.
Our policy goals reflect this commitment to economic stability as the key contribution to sustained growth, stable prices, declining interest rates, and falling unemployment.
The American people have a right to expect such results and, with the cooperation of the Congress and the Federal Reserve, we expect to continue to deliver them.
THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF GOVERNMENT
In formulating our program for healthy and continued economic expansion, we recognized the limited role that government properly plays.
The Federal Government cannot provide prosperity or generate economic growth;
it can only encourage private initiative, innovation, and entrepreneurial activity that produce economic opportunities.
An overly active government actually hinders economic progress.
Federal spending absorbs resources, many of which could be better used by the private sector.
Excessive taxation distorts relative prices and relative rates of return.
By arbitrarily reallocating resources, it inhibits the economy’s ability to grow.
Thus, the best way for government to promote economic growth is to provide a foundation of stable, predictable economic policies, and then to stand back and let the creative potential of the American people flourish.
The Federal Government has several definite responsibilities that my Administration continues to uphold.
The first is to provide an adequate national defense.
World peace and security require the United States, as the leader of the free world, to demonstrate its willingness and ability to defend its own national security and to contribute to the defense of its allies.
Furthermore, we will not ignore the less fortunate in this society.
My Administration continues to provide an appropriate safety net to aid those individuals who need help.
At the same time, we have worked to develop a strong, vibrant, opportunity-generating economy that can offer meaningful jobs to all who are able to work.
The economic expansion has done much more to reduce poverty than any government transfer program.
The significant decline in the percentage of the population in poverty in 1984 reflects both the success of our programs and the strength of the economy.
Moreover, tax reform will benefit the working poor.
My proposed tax reforms eliminate the Federal income tax burden of most working poor.
Finally, even though we believe that markets generally allocate resources most efficiently, there are a few special cases, such as air and water pollution, in which the market mechanism alone may be inadequate.
In these instances, government intervention is necessary, but even here, it should be based on market principles.
For example, the Environmental Protection Agency has approved arrangements that enable firms to earn credits for reducing emissions below the required limit, which they can sell to other firms facing higher costs of emission control.
In this way, environmental quality is maintained and improved while the costs of compliance decline.
Control Federal Spending
Fulfillment of these limited responsibilities, however, does not require the level or the rate of growth of Federal spending that the Nation has been experiencing.
In spite of our efforts, spending remains excessive and has been the primary cause of the large budget deficit.
Tax rate cuts did not generate this deficit;
in fact, current tax receipts are as large a share of GNP as they were in the late 1970s, even after the reduction in tax rates that we initiated in 1981.
The key to resolving the Federal budget deficit is to restrain unneeded spending.
Spending, not the deficit, is the true indicator of the cost of government, because it measures the total economic resources diverted from the private sector.
Excessive spending affects the economy in deleterious ways regardless of whether it is financed through taxation, borrowing, or even inflation.
Private capital formation is reduced, resources are inefficiently allocated, and economic growth is slowed.
I applaud and support the newly enacted Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, known commonly as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, as a way to work with the Congress to reduce Federal spending and the deficit.
I intend to submit budgets in each of the coming years that satisfy the act’s deficit targets, not by sacrificing the programs essential to the Nation, but by reforming or eliminating those programs that are ineffective or nonessential.
I reject the notion of increased taxes.
Higher taxes would only encourage more Federal spending and limit the economy’s ability to grow.
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings accomplishes only part of our long-term objective of Federal fiscal responsibility.
Properly applied, it will produce a balanced budget by 1991, but it does not guarantee a continued balanced budget thereafter.
We must now direct our attention to a constitutional amendment providing for a permanently balanced budget.
Together, these two measures will provide an orderly transition to a balanced budget, restrain future spending, and ensure that future fiscal decisions are prudent and responsive to the national interests.
Accordingly, I continue to support strongly and to urge the adoption of a balanced-budget constitutional amendment.
I also seek legislation that would authorize the President to veto individual line items in appropriations measures.
Such authority is essential to ensure that only effective and essential government programs are funded.
Reform Taxes
Over the years, successive modifications of the Federal tax code have resulted in a complex tax system that contains many loopholes and artificially encourages some types of activities at the expense of others.
Furthermore, the inflation of the 1970s distorted the overall pattern of capital taxation and pushed personal incomes into ever higher tax brackets, discouraging saving and investment.
Our actions to reduce tax rates have corrected many of these distortions and inequities.
Individual income tax rates have been reduced and indexed to the inflation rate;
effective tax rates on new investment have been lowered substantially.
Still, more must be done.
In May 1985, I submitted to the Congress a comprehensive reform of the tax code to make it simpler, fairer, and more conducive to economic growth.
I proposed
reducing marginal tax rates for individuals and businesses,
broadening the tax base by eliminating the majority of existing loopholes,
taxing different activities consistently so that resources are allocated on the basis of economic merit and not tax considerations, and
compensating for or eliminating much of the remaining influence of inflation on effective tax rates on capital.
Just before it recessed, the House of Representatives passed a tax reform bill that incorporated some of these principles.
Despite substantive differences between my proposal and the House bill, I urged its passage to move the legislative process forward.
We will now work with the Senate to generate a fair and simple tax code that is truly pro-family, pro-jobs, and pro-growth.
Eliminate Counterproductive Regulation
Tax reform is only one part of our goal to enable markets to function more efficiently in allocating resources.
We have also worked hard to identify and remove government regulations that impede the operation of markets, inhibit competition, or impose unnecessary costs on firms and unnecessarily high prices on consumers.
The regulation of domestic oil prices provides a good example of the deleterious economic effects that regulation can have as it distorts relative prices and prevents necessary adjustments.
The results of my accelerating the deregulation of oil prices in January 1981 are now apparent.
Oil imports have declined, and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has found it impossible to sustain its previous levels of high prices.
In contrast, the natural gas market is still plagued by distortions induced by price controls.
In 1983, we unsuccessfully urged the Congress to deregulate natural gas prices.
We will again pursue legislation that would completely deregulate natural gas prices.
In addition, we are proposing further deregulation of the trucking industry.
We will continue efforts to reduce government involvement in two particular sectors of the economy.
First, the banking and credit system remains rife with regulations and loan guarantees that arbitrarily allocate credit and hamper the system’s ability to adapt to changing economic conditions.
While we must continue to protect the public against severe economic disturbances, we should allow financial institutions greater freedom in determining the composition of their assets and liabilities so that they can respond more flexibly to the changes they encounter.
Second, heavy government involvement also persists in many agricultural markets.
Government policies, intended as solutions, have so distorted incentives that they have actually caused some of agriculture’s current problems.
The legislation that I proposed in 1985 was designed to return American agriculture gradually to a free market.
The bill passed by the Congress in late 1985 contained some of my proposed reforms, but preserved some of the policies that now hamper agriculture.
In particular, it maintained counterproductive government intervention in the dairy industry, mandated export subsidies, and continued costly distortions of the sugar market.
We will continue to pursue further agricultural reform that lessens government involvement in these areas and increases opportunities for farmers to compete successfully in world markets.
Transfer Some Services to the Private Sector
The Federal Government has increasingly sought to provide services that can be more efficiently provided by the private sector.
To address this problem, I have established a working group to investigate which government functions could be effectively returned to the private sector.
I have also included several initiatives in this area in the recently released budget.
This strategy does not necessarily require eliminating services now provided by the government.
Rather, it would make private alternatives available.
Such a strategy ensures production of services that are demanded by consumers, not those chosen by government bureaucrats.
It also leads to more efficient and lower cost production of those services, and often removes government-imposed restraints on competition.
Maintain Free and Fair Trade
Our pursuit of unencumbered markets is not confined to the domestic economy.
Our international trade policy rests firmly on the foundation of free and open markets.
The benefits of free trade are well known:
it generates more jobs, a more productive use of a nation’s resources, more rapid innovation, and higher standards of living both for this Nation and its trading partners.
While a unilateral commitment to free trade benefits the Nation, Americans gain even more when U.S. trading partners also open their markets.
My Administration will actively pursue this goal.
An important part of our trade program is to begin a new round of multilateral trade negotiations.
Under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, we are seeking to engage U.S. trading partners in comprehensive negotiations that will generate freer trade, increased access for U.S. exports, and a stronger international trading system.
To complement this initiative, we are continuing to explore the possibility of establishing bilateral free trade zones with some U.S. trading partners.
We do not blindly pursue free trade.
We also strive to ensure that trade is fair by vigilantly enforcing current trade laws.
Unfair trade practices abroad harm U.S. exporters as well as reduce standards of living worldwide; this is unacceptable.
In an unprecedented move, I have asked the U.S. Trade Representative to initiate unfair trade practice investigations under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974.
Such investigations are not intended to produce retaliatory action by the United States, but rather to achieve more open markets internationally.
In this way, we hope to convey the message that a commitment to free and fair trade is a reciprocal obligation in this increasingly interrelated world trading community.
The large trade deficit that has evolved during the current expansion has subjected our free and fair trade policy to much criticism, especially from the Congress.
During the past year, more than 300 pieces of protectionist legislation have been considered or proposed.
While the conditions that have led to the trade deficit have adversely affected some U.S. industries, increased protectionism is not the solution.
Protectionist measures will have little effect on the trade balance and will only decrease standards of living and inefficiently redistribute resources within the economy.
Our agreement with four other major industrialized nations in September 1985 was an important recognition that economic policy changes across countries (not only in the United States) are essential to correct trade imbalances worldwide and to realign currency values.
To this end, we reaffirmed our commitment to continue efforts to reduce the Federal Government deficit by lowering spending as a share of GNP.
We urged the Congress to enact Grammy-Rudman-Hollings to achieve that goal.
America’s trading partners, in turn, committed themselves to policies designed to foster increased internally generated economic growth and, hence, increased demand for U.S. exports.
These policy objectives are important for less developed countries as well.
Indeed, a central facet of the Secretary of the Treasury’s recent initiatives to assist in resolving the debt-servicing problems of these countries is that they pursue policies to promote growth, reduce inflation, and secure balance of payments adjustment.
CONCLUSION
My Administration recognizes the responsibility of the Federal Government to promote economic growth and individual opportunity through policies that lead to maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.
We intend to maintain this course with policies that continue to promote strong, sustainable, noninflationary growth and provide expanding economic opportunities for all.
We shall continue to resist additional government involvement as a solution to short-term problems.
Such involvement has been unsuccessful in the past and ultimately becomes part of the problem rather than part of the solution.
With the cooperation and support of the Congress and the independent agencies, we will pursue the appropriate policies necessary to sustain the current expansion and to stabilize prices.

TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:
For 6 years, my Administration has pursued policies to promote sustained, noninflationary growth and greater opportunity for all Americans.
We have put in place policies that are in the long-term best interest of the Nation, policies that rely on the inherent vigor of our economy and its ability to allocate resources efficiently and generate economic growth.
Taming the Federal Government’s propensity to overtax, overspend, and overregulate has been a major element of these policies.
THE CURRENT EXPANSION
Our market-oriented policies have paid off.
The economic expansion is now in its fifth year, and the growth rate of the gross national product, adjusted for inflation, should accelerate to 3.2 percent in 1987.
By October, the current expansion will become the longest peacetime expansion of the postwar era.
Since the beginning of this expansion, the economy has created more than 12 million new jobs.
In each of the past 2 years, the percentage of the working-age population with jobs was the highest on record.
Although I am encouraged by the fall in the overall unemployment rate to 6.6 percent in December 1986, I will not be satisfied until all Americans who want to work can find a job.
Our efforts to reduce taxes and inflation and to eliminate excessive regulation have created a favorable climate for investing in new plant and equipment.
Business fixed investment set records as a share of real gross national product in 1984 and 1985, and remains high by historical standards.
Despite the economy’s tremendous gains in employment and production, inflation has remained below or near 4 percent for the past 5 years and, in 1986, declined to its lowest rate in 25 years.
Although last year’s low inflation rate in part reflected the substantial decline in energy prices during 1986, we expect inflation in 1987 to continue at the moderate pace experienced during the first 3 years of the expansion.
The financial markets have acknowledged our progress in reducing inflation from its double-digit levels, and interest rates declined during 1986, reaching their lowest levels in 9 years.
To sustain these developments, the Federal Reserve should continue to pursue monetary and credit policies that serve the joint goals of growth and price stability.
In short, since 1982, we have avoided the economic problems that plagued our recent past—accelerating inflation, rising interest rates, and severe recessions.
Production and employment have grown significantly, while inflation has remained low and interest rates have declined.
This expansion already has achieved substantial progress toward our long-term goals of sustainable economic growth and price stability.
THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF GOVERNMENT
Government should play a limited role in the economy.
The Federal Government should encourage a stable economy in which people can make informed decisions.
It should not make those decisions for them, nor should it arbitrarily distort economic choices by the way it taxes or regulates productive activity.
It should not and cannot continue to spend excessively, abuse its power to tax, and borrow to live beyond its means.
The Federal Government should provide certain goods and services, public in nature and national in scope, that private firms cannot effectively provide—
but it should not try to provide public goods and services that State or local governments can provide more efficiently.
When government removes decisions from individuals and private firms, incentives to produce become dulled and distorted;
growth, productivity, and employment suffer.
Therefore, to the greatest extent possible, the Federal Government should foster responsible individual action and should rely on the initiative of the private sector.
TAX REFORM
My 1984 State of the Union Message set tax reform as a national priority.
After more than 2 years of bipartisan effort, we achieved our goal last fall when I signed into law the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Tax reform broadens the personal and corporate income tax bases and substantially reduces tax rates.
These changes benefit Americans in at least three ways.
First, by reducing marginal tax rates, tax reform enhances incentives to work, save, and invest.
Second, by reducing disparities in tax rates on income from alternative capital investments, tax reform encourages more efficient deployment of investment funds.
Investment decisions will now reflect the productive merits of an activity more than its tax consequences, leading to a more efficient allocation of resources, higher growth, and more jobs.
Finally, tax reform makes the tax system more equitable.
The simpler, lower rate structure will make compliance easier and tax avoidance less attractive.
Americans will know that everyone is now paying his or her fair share and is not hiding income behind loopholes or in unproductive shelters.
Tax reform will especially benefit millions of working poor by removing them from the Federal income tax rolls.
REMAINING CHALLENGES OF ECONOMIC POLICY
We have successfully reformed the tax code, controlled inflation, and reduced government intervention in the economy.
The result has been an expansion of production and employment, now in its fifth year, which we fully expect will continue with greater strength in 1987.
Although much has been accomplished, we must and will address the remaining challenges confronting the economy.
We must continue to reduce the Federal budget deficit through spending restraint.
We must reduce the trade deficit, while avoiding protectionism.
We must strengthen America’s productivity and competitiveness in the world economy.
And we must reform our costly, inefficient, and unfair agricultural programs.
Control Federal Spending
For the first time since 1973, Federal spending in 1987 will fall in real terms.
As a result, the Federal budget deficit will decline from its 1986 level by nearly $50 billion.
My budget for 1988 continues this process by meeting the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit target of $108 billion.
Deficit reduction must continue and must be achieved by restraining the growth of Federal spending—not by raising taxes, which would reduce growth and opportunity.
Large and persistent Federal deficits shift the burden of paying for current government spending to future generations.
Deficit reduction achieved through spending restraint is essential if we are to preserve the substantial benefits of tax rate reduction and tax code reform;
it is also essential for reducing our international payments imbalances.
Finally, spending on many programs exceeds the amounts necessary to provide essential Federal services in a cost-effective manner.
Besides exercising spending restraint, we must reform the budget process to build a check on the Federal Government’s power to overtax and overspend.
I support a constitutional amendment providing for a balanced peacetime budget, and I ask the Congress to give the President the same power that 43 Governors have—the power to veto individual line items in appropriations measures.
Maintain Free and Fair Trade
One of the principal challenges remaining for the U.S. economy is to reduce our trade deficit.
However, we cannot accomplish this, or make American firms more competitive, by resorting to protectionism.
Protectionism is antigrowth.
It would make us less competitive, not more.
It would not create jobs.
It would hurt most Americans in the interest of helping a few.
It would invite retaliation by our trading partners.
In the long run, protectionism would trap us in those areas of our economy where we are relatively weak, instead of allowing growth in areas where we are relatively strong.
We cannot gain from protectionism.
But we can gain by working steadfastly to eliminate unfair trading practices and to open markets around the world.
This year, I will continue to press to open foreign markets and to oppose vigorously unfair trading practices wherever they may exist.
In addition, I will ask the Congress to renew the President’s negotiating authority for the Uruguay Round under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
These talks offer an important and promising opportunity to liberalize trade in areas critical to the United States; trade in services, protection of intellectual property rights, fair rules governing international investment, and world trade in agricultural products.
More remains to be done to end our trade deficit.
We must sustain world economic growth, increase productivity, and restrain government spending.
For U.S. exports to grow, the economies of our trading partners must grow.
Therefore, it is essential that our trading partners enact policies that will promote internally generated economic growth.
At the Tokyo Economic Summit last year, the leaders of the seven largest industrial countries continued efforts, begun at the Versailles Economic Summit in 1982, to increase international coordination of economic policies.
We must also continue to encourage developing countries to adopt policy reforms to promote growth and restore creditworthiness.
Here in the United States, we must restrain government spending.
Our trade deficit in goods and services reflects that, over the past several years, we have spent more than we have produced—and we have spent too much because of the profligacy of the Federal Government.
As the Congress reviews my proposed 1988 budget, it should remember that a vote for more government spending is a vote against correcting our trade deficit.
Strengthen Productivity and Competitiveness
We must work to improve our international competitiveness through greater productivity growth.
The depreciation of the dollar since early 1985 has done much to restore our competitiveness.
However, we do not want to rely on exchange-rate movements alone.
Productivity growth provides the means by which we can strengthen our competitiveness while increasing income and opportunity.
Since 1981, U.S. manufacturing productivity has grown at a rate 46 percent faster than the postwar average.
This is a solid accomplishment, but still more remains to be done.
We must encourage continued productivity growth in manufacturing and in other sectors of our economy.
One way to strengthen our global competitiveness is to free American producers from unnecessary regulation.
My Administration has sought to deregulate industries in which increased competition will provide greater benefits to consumers and producers.
It has also streamlined the Federal Government’s regulatory structure.
Americans have benefited significantly from the deregulation of airlines, financial services, railroads, and trucking.
I will resist any attempt to reregulate these industries.
Our economy will benefit further if we eliminate natural gas price controls, remaining trucking regulations, and unnecessary labor market restrictions.
Also, without compromising the Nation’s air quality, we should eliminate the bias that exists in current air pollution regulations against cleaner and more efficient new factories and power facilities.
Where regulation is necessary, its costs should be balanced against its benefits to ensure that regulatory efforts are applied where they do the most good and to avoid placing American firms at a competitive disadvantage in the world marketplace.
Privatization shifts the production of goods and services from government ownership to the private sector.
Privatization can also improve American competitiveness because private firms can produce better quality goods and services, and deliver them to consumers at lower cost, than can government.
For these reasons, Americans benefit when government steps aside.
Like deregulation and federalism, privatization embodies my Administration’s belief that the Federal Government should minimize its interference in the marketplace and in local governance.
We must return more government activities to the competitive marketplace by selling or transferring government-owned businesses.
In 1986, the Congress authorized the Department of Transportation to sell Conrail in a public offering, which we hope will take place this year.
Other businesses suitable for privatization include the Naval Petroleum Reserves, the Alaska Power Administration, and Amtrak.
Reform Agricultural Policies
Another high priority in 1987 must be to reform our agricultural programs.
Besides costing taxpayers $34 billion this year alone, these programs divert land, labor, and other resources from their most productive uses.
Most farm programs are costly and unfair because they give literally millions of dollars to relatively few individuals and corporations while many family farmers—who are those most often in need—receive little.
In the process, farm programs raise the prices of many food items for all Americans, rich and poor.
Farm income support should not be linked to production through direct subsidies or propped-up prices for agricultural products.
My Administration will seek a market-oriented reform package with two goals: gradually separating farm income support from farm production, and focusing that income support on those family farmers who need it most.
CONCLUSION
The economic policies of my Administration have created greater economic freedom and opportunity for men and women, private firms, and State and local governments to pursue their own interests and make their own decisions.
These policies have produced a sustained economic expansion with low inflation, lower tax rates and a simpler tax code, the unshackling of industries from regulation, a surge in investment spending, and more than 12 million new jobs.
The American people demand a sound, productive, growing economy.
Therefore, I shall continue to pursue policies to encourage growth, reduce the Federal budget deficit, correct the trade deficit, and strengthen the competitiveness of American producers.
The American people will not tolerate a replay of the failed economic policies of the past.
Therefore, I shall resist proposals to adopt any economic policy that abandons the accomplishments of tax reform, stymies growth, fuels inflation, perpetuates needless government interference in the marketplace, or fosters protectionism.
With the help and cooperation of the Congress, we can sustain and strengthen the current economic expansion, and preserve and extend the economic achievements of the past 6 years.

TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:
My first Economic Report, issued in 1982 after a year in office, could look only to the future for encouraging economic news.
The task of rebuilding the economy was just beginning, and hard choices were being made.
Inflation had begun to come down from double-digit rates, but America was mired in recession, its second in as many years.
Today, however, we can point to real, solid economic progress.
The policies of this Administration have spurred and sustained a record economic expansion the longest in U.S. peacetime.
Fifteen million new jobs have been created during this expansion, with strong gains widespread across industries and demographic groups.
Real gross national product (GNP) has risen nearly 23 percent during these 5 years of growth.
And the accomplishments are not all in the past.
Our policies will continue to contribute to rising standards of living in the years ahead.
By enhancing private incentives and opportunities for work, investment, and entrepreneurship, we have laid the groundwork for growth far into the future.
To ensure that the renewed energy of the private sector remains a force for growth, we must continue our efforts to bring down the Federal deficit through restraint on spending, to resist the siren song of protectionism, to support policies that foster noninflationary economic growth, and to rein in government when it threatens to make our markets less open, our industries less responsive, or our economy less flexible.
THE ECONOMIC EXPANSION
Since November 1982, the U.S. economy has grown without interruption and without a resurgence of inflation.
Only twice before in our Nation’s history—but never during peacetime—has recorded economic growth continued for so long.
During the current expansion a strong increase in employment, combined with low rates of inflation and higher productivity growth, have meant rising standards of living for the American people.
Employment has increased dramatically, and all demographic groups have benefited.
While overall employment has risen about 15 percent since November 1982, employment of blacks has increased by more than 25 percent and employment of Hispanics by more than 40 percent.
Correspondingly, unemployment rates—especially among minorities—have fallen rapidly, although those rates are still unacceptably high.
I believe that all who want jobs should be able to obtain employment commensurate with their skills and abilities.
As the unemployment rate has declined by almost one-half, some have claimed that the new jobs are low-quality, dead-end positions, while others have argued that booming employment has put us on the verge of another round of inflation.
Neither view is accurate.
The facts show that the strongest job growth has been in the higher paid, high-skill occupations.
The bulk of the new jobs created have been full-time positions in occupations that pay well.
While it is true that the number of jobs in manufacturing has risen more slowly than in the service-producing sector of the economy, this is a reflection of the innovation of American business and the skill of American workers, not a sign that the United States is “deindustrializing.”
The share of manufacturing output in total output actually has risen over the course of the expansion, and it is now above its postwar average.
However, rapid increases in manufacturing productivity have meant slower growth in employment in this sector.
This strong productivity growth, in combination with the downward adjustment of the dollar’s exchange rate, has lifted the competitiveness of our products on world markets.
Around the globe, products “Made in the U.S.A.” are becoming more common and more sought after.
Moreover, I do not believe that our economy has yet reached its full potential, or that our economic growth threatens price stability.
Growth can and should continue.
With sound and stable economic policies, saving and investment will be encouraged, and the Nation’s productive capacity will continue to expand.
I remain committed to the goal of price level stability, and I view the decline in inflation during my Administration as a major accomplishment.
I would not take lightly the prospect of a resurgence of inflation.
But economic growth itself will not lead to a spiral of worsening inflation;
only irresponsible economic policies would do that.
Our economic projections show inflation slowing during the coming years, even as output grows at a robust average annual rate of 3.2 percent.
But continued economic progress requires that policymakers adhere to forward-looking principles, pursuing the long-term best interests of the Nation through a sustained commitment to growth and stability.
The prospects for growth in the immediate future have been diminished somewhat by last year’s plunge in the stock market, as well as by the increase in interest rates and tightening of monetary policy during 1987.
Nevertheless, I anticipate that the U.S. economy will continue to post gains in 1988, as the expansion moves through its 6th year.
The past 5 years have marked an outstanding period of economic growth in the United States.
It has been unusual in its longevity, unusual for the fact that inflation has remained subdued, and unusual relative to the performance of other industrial economies.
Between 1982 and 1986, American businesses, large and small, created two and one-half times as many new jobs as Japan and the major industrial countries of Europe combined.
In 1987 this trend appears to have continued, as the U.S. economy again generated new jobs at a remarkable rate.
The U.S. unemployment rate has fallen 5 percentage points, and now stands well below those in most other major industrialized countries, where unemployment rates have yet to recover fully from the last recession.
Overall, we have not lost jobs because of foreign trade.
Instead, growth-oriented policies of lower and fairer taxes, reduced interference by government, and free and open international trade have been a source of strength for the economy.
Indeed, the U.S. economy has flourished, and the outlook is full of promise.
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN THE ECONOMY
It is hard to believe that at the beginning of the 1980s the prevailing attitude toward the economy could best be described as despair.
Inflation and interest rates had ratcheted higher with each successive business cycle, and, as the economy suffered through its second recession in 2 years, the goal of sustainable growth appeared increasingly elusive.
Amid double-digit inflation and unemployment rates, there were calls for the Federal Government to do more and more, thereby compounding the failed policies of the past.
Instead, I took government policy back to the basics, and the last 5 years of economic growth testify to the vitality of free markets and the productivity of the American people.
Government intrusions in the Nation’s economic life have been reduced, and the private sector has responded with an explosion of activity, creating new products and new jobs at a very rapid rate.
The Federal Government has an important role to play in the Nation’s economy, but it is a limited role.
As a general proposition, economic decisions should be left to the private sector, which has been our economy’s strength throughout its history, or to State and local governments when the issues cannot be handled satisfactorily by the private sector.
Only in issues truly national in scope is there a role for the Federal Government.
We have made efforts to restrain Federal spending, to limit it to only the government’s vital functions, and those efforts have borne fruit.
Last fiscal year, for the first time in 14 years, Federal outlays, after adjustment for inflation, declined.
Government spending on goods and services absorbs resources that might be used better by the private sector, and any Federal outlay must be financed eventually by inflation or taxes.
Because there is no free lunch, we must make the hard choices, funding only those programs that are in the best interest of the Nation, not those that happen to have the most influential lobbyists.
For example, while a strong national defense is rightly the responsibility of the Federal Government, a continued proliferation of pork-barrel projects is not.
America’s sense of fair play is violated when hard-earned tax dollars are needlessly turned over to powerful special interests.
In the conduct of macroeconomic policies, we have turned away from the stop-and-go policies of the past.
My Administration has adopted a long-term view that fiscal policy determines the division of economic activity between the public and private sectors and is not meant to respond to every rise and fall in the economic data.
Similarly, monetary policy should provide adequate liquidity for sustained noninflationary growth.
Together, these policies create a stable environment in which individuals and businesses can plan for the future and make the most of their economic opportunities.
For too long the Federal Government has interfered unnecessarily in private economic decisions.
There is a legitimate, although limited, role for the Federal Government in certain industries—for example, in ensuring the safety and soundness of the Nation’s banking and payments systems.
But many government regulations impede the operation of markets, inhibit competition, or impose costs on firms and raise the prices faced by consumers, without providing commensurate benefits.
Regulations that interfere with the efficient use of labor, investment, and raw materials ultimately reduce our productive potential, making this country worse off.
While my Administration has been successful in reducing many regulations and intrusions into markets, much remains to be done.
We must lessen remaining disincentives to work, diminish the burden of Federal regulations, and dismantle government programs that needlessly subsidize inefficient producers.
In particular, we must release financial institutions from outdated legal restraints, eliminate the remaining controls on interstate trucking, deregulate natural gas, and repeal mileage standards for new automobiles.
We must resist appeals for even more government intervention that would introduce additional inefficiencies, such as requiring advance notification of layoffs and plant closings.
With few exceptions, the private sector is best able to allocate resources to their most highly valued uses, and it should be allowed to do so without excessive paperwork and restrictions.
That is why privatization, deregulation, and private sector initiatives have been important elements of my economic program.
I believe in the inherent dynamism of the private sector, and I believe that the most constructive thing government usually can do is simply get out of the way.
THE INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT
This Administration has been a force for economic change in the United States and, by our example, in the world at large.
Our proven market-oriented policies are being adopted in more and more countries around the globe, as they recognize the high costs of big government and the harmful effects of stifling the entrepreneurial spirit.
In order to enhance growth and economic opportunity, many nations have followed our lead, undertaking reductions in sky-high tax rates that diminish incentives to work, save, and produce.
In addition, tax reform is becoming a worldwide movement.
Just as in the United States, tax reform abroad promises to end many distortions and inefficiencies, allowing businesses and individuals to make decisions about production and investment in order to increase their economic well-being, rather than simply to reduce their tax bills.
From continent to continent, the benefits of privatization and deregulation are becoming appreciated.
Even China, and perhaps now even the Soviet Union, appear to be edging toward freer economic systems.
Instead of viewing private enterprise as the adversary, many governments now see it as their best hope for progress and prosperity.
Developing as well as industrialized nations are reducing market rigidities and interferences, thereby expanding economic freedom and opportunity for their citizens.
In those developing countries that encourage investment and private enterprise, the ensuing economic growth should contribute to lessening their debt problems.
The debt burden carried by developing countries is not just their problem;
we all have a vital interest in finding solutions that promote growth and protect open international financial markets.
And we will continue to work with all who display a real determination to deal with this difficult issue.
The United States has been a constructive force in the world economy, not only by demonstrating the benefits of private enterprise, but also by our commitment to free trade and international economic cooperation.
In addition, this Nation’s strong demands for imports helped support output growth abroad during much of this decade.
The world economy has become increasingly interdependent, as trade has multiplied and financial markets have become essentially global.
To continue to reap the benefits of an open international trading system, we are committed to reducing further the barriers that interfere with the free flow of goods, services, and capital.
To this end, the United States has entered into, and will continue to seek out, bilateral and multilateral agreements to lower impediments to international commerce.
The Free-Trade Agreement recently negotiated with Canada is an historic accomplishment.
Once the necessary implementing legislation is passed, it will establish the largest international free-trade area in the world.
At the same time, in the Uruguay Round of the multilateral negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, we have been working to lower trade barriers worldwide.
In that forum, we have placed special emphasis on eliminating spiraling subsidies to agricultural production and harmful barriers to agricultural imports, on establishing and enforcing adequate protections for intellectual property, on liberalizing trade in services, and on ensuring evenhanded treatment of foreign investment.
Through these avenues and others, we will continue to pursue the goal of free and fair trade, which can only expand opportunity and prosperity both at home and abroad.
THE CHALLENGES AHEAD
The American people elected me to this office with a vision of a reinvigorated economy, and I have watched that vision become reality.
The resurgence of America has confirmed my optimism.
The accomplishments of the last 7 years should inspire us, but not blind us to the important challenges that remain.
Foremost among our challenges is the continued high level of Federal spending and the budget deficit.
Federal receipts last year were $255 billion above their level in 1981;
nevertheless, the deficit has nearly doubled since then, bloated by a $326 billion increase in outlays.
Although we have succeeded recently in slowing the growth of spending, and the deficit declined by $71 billion in the last fiscal year, the deficit is still too large.
Recent progress in controlling Federal outlays notwithstanding, as a percent of GNP, outlays remain well above the postwar average.
The government continues to spend too much, absorbing resources that could be put to better use by the private sector.
There are several essential functions of the Federal Government, such as providing a strong national defense and ensuring an appropriate safety net for those in need, but in many areas the government’s presence is oppressive and unnecessary.
Tax increases are not the key to eliminating the deficit.
Some taxes are unavoidable—the necessary functions of the Federal Government must be paid for.
But tax reform and the cuts that have been instituted in income tax rates represent successful efforts to find less distorting, less burdensome, and more equitable means of financing government.
Undoing tax reform through tax increases would affect economic activity adversely by raising uncertainty about government policy and reducing incentives to work and produce.
Rather, in coming years we should look to ways to enhance incentives for investment in future productive capacity, including reducing the tax rate on capital gains.
The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law and our recent agreement with the Congress on a 2-year budget-trimming package have charted the course for additional deficit reduction.
Those are steps in the right direction.
But the budget process itself remains a major obstacle to eliminating the deficit.
And I am not the only one to have noticed that the budget process is a disaster;
a recent survey of Members of Congress identified it as a major source of frustration.
The process is not working and it must be reformed;
discipline and responsibility must be restored.
Current budget practice is to deliver a pair of mammoth bills that must be passed and signed in a matter of hours—or the government has to shut down.
This is not responsible government, and I will not sign another of these behemoths.
This budget process does not serve the best interests of the Nation, it does not allow sufficient review of spending priorities, and it undermines the checks and balances established by the Constitution.
So that such massive appropriations bills do not have to be an all-or-nothing proposition, I have asked for the line-item veto, a power that 43 State Governors already have.
With a line-item veto, future Presidents could pare away waste and enforce budget discipline.
In addition, expanded rescission powers would allow the Executive to cut unnecessary spending on programs that, in many cases, have outlived their usefulness.
Finally, to ensure that balanced budgets become a permanent feature of our fiscal landscape, the legislatures of 32 States have asked for—and I endorse—a constitutional amendment to force the Federal Government to live within its means.
These steps must be taken, because the current budget process is impeding budget progress.
By its very nature, the democratic process is often messy and unfocused.
But we know that democracy works and that tough decisions can be made.
We must rise to the challenge again and prove that we can craft sound budgets through a sensible process.
We also must resist efforts to push the Nation into protectionism.
Our foreign trade deficit is very large, but it has turned the corner in real terms.
Last year foreign trade contributed significantly to our economic growth.
Moreover, further improvements are on the way.
At this point especially, it would be a tragic mistake to attempt to close the trade gap by closing our markets.
Isolating U.S. markets could only lead to a global downward spiral in trade and economic activity.
My Administration is committed to working diligently with the Congress to draft responsible trade legislation, but if that legislation is not free of harmful protectionist measures, I will veto it.
Our goal is to see the trade deficit reduced in an environment of sustained economic growth and low inflation.
To this end, we are working with the other major industrial countries to coordinate economic policies that sustain noninflationary economic growth, encourage an orderly reduction of international imbalances, and thereby foster stability of exchange rates.
We must maintain the confidence of foreigners and our citizens alike in the ability of the United States to generate profitable investment opportunities and to follow responsible economic policies.
The vitality of free and open markets, full of opportunity and promise, is the best foundation for investment.
We must see to it that our tax structures and regulations do not discourage saving and investing.
We must encourage investment not only in plant and equipment, but also in the American people themselves.
Education, skills, research and development—these are some of the most fruitful areas for investment;
expanded knowledge enhances the productive potential of our most valuable resource, our people.
CONCLUSION
America is blessed with great gifts—abundant land and natural resources, a diverse and hard-working people, an unshakable tradition of democratic values.
My confidence in America has been shown to be well-founded over these past few years.
The economy has been revitalized, and the record peacetime economic expansion has brought with it renewed opportunities and enhanced well-being.
We set ourselves a formidable task: to reduce and to rationalize the role of government in the economy.
That effort has been richly rewarded.
During our watch, the U.S. economy again has shown its strength.
But our job is not finished.
The Federal budget must be controlled in order to build a solid foundation for future economic growth.
And I will not be satisfied until all Americans share in this prosperity;
there are still too many enmeshed in poverty and without jobs.
We must rise to our remaining challenges, heartened by our triumphs and inspired by the resilience of a resurgent America.
