To the Congress of the United States:
As the year 1947 opens America has never been so strong or so prosperous.
Nor have our prospects ever been brighter.
Yet in the minds of a great many of us there is a fear of another depression, the loss of our jobs, our farms, our businesses.
But America was not built on fear.
America was built on courage, on imagination and an unbeatable determination to do the job at hand.
The job at hand today is to see to it that America is not ravaged by recurring depressions and long periods of unemployment, but that instead we build an economy so fruitful, so dynamic, so progressive that each citizen can count upon opportunity and security for himself and his family.
Nor is prosperity in the United States important to the American people alone.
It is the foundation of world prosperity and world peace.
And the world is looking to us.
I believe that the American people have the wisdom and the will to use our abundant resources so that all may prosper.
I reject, and I know the American people reject, the notion that we must have another depression.
I am not referring to minor detours and bumps in the road ahead—these we know we shall have.
I am referring to economic collapse and stagnation such as started in 1929.
This need not happen again, and must not happen again.
The Congress passed the Employment Act of 1946 by an overwhelming bipartisan vote.
This Act wisely provided for a Council of Economic Advisers to the President, men who as a result of training, experience, and attainments are exceptionally qualified to analyze and interpret economic developments, to appraise programs and activities of the Government and formulate and recommend national economic policy.
The Congress also provided for a permanent joint committee to receive and analyze this annual Economic Report of the President and to submit recommendations concerning it to both Houses.
In transmitting this first Economic Report, I am conscious of its significance as the beginning of a series of reports that will serve the Executive and the Congress as the basis for an orderly and continuing review of the economic state of the union and for integrated and comprehensive steps to ensure the permanent economic health of the Nation.
The Economic Report is an opportunity for national self-examination and self-criticism.
It is a challenge to the President and the Congress to determine the causes of whatever problems we face in our economic life and to find the solutions to those problems.
It provides an opportunity for all our citizens to judge the merits of the analysis and proposed action.
It is a new and splendid tool to help us in our tasks.
And like all governmental tools, its effectiveness will increase year by year as we learn by doing.
Prosperity cannot be the concern of one party or of one group.
It cannot be attained without the goodwill and the cooperation of all.
To build a greater America we must approach the task with unity of purpose, with patience, with wisdom, and with determination to overcome all obstacles.
If we do this—and we must—I have no doubt about the ability of Americans to build, on a firm basis of security and political and economic freedom, a country in which the rewards we enjoy can be doubled within the life span of many of those now living.
