To the Congress of the United States:
IN my first Economic Report to the Congress, presented a year ago in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of 1946, I foresaw a bright prospect for the year 1947.
In large measure that prospect has been fulfilled.
However, my Midyear Report recorded the fact that agricultural prospects had become less favorable, that certain price adjustments were not proceeding satisfactorily, and that the need for foreign aid would probably be greater and more prolonged than had been anticipated.
During the six months since that report, the country has maintained a high level of prosperity but on a wave of inflation which has already caused serious hardship and presents grave concern for the future.
In this second annual Economic Report, I shall set forth the difficulties of the situation by which the Nation is confronted as it enters 1948.
At the same time, I have great confidence in our ability to surmount these difficulties and to show another year of splendid achievement for the welfare of our own people and the meeting of our responsibilities in the family of nations.
Foreword and Summary
THE year 1947 has afforded a new demonstration of the tremendous productivity of the United States when our natural resources, our accumulated capital, and our able and enterprising labor force are used at high levels of activity.
Looked at from another point of view, the year has revealed the previously unmeasured size of the profitable market which is furnished when nearly 60 million workers are steadily employed with modern equipment and organization.
With high pay rolls and relatively few work stoppages and with a new high record in farm income, most of the people were able to enjoy a level of consumption far above prewar standards.
We were able also to satisfy many of the wants for durable consumers’ goods whose production had been curtailed during the war and to extend the conveniences of life and modest luxuries to a larger percentage of our homes than had ever shared them in the past.
In addition, we were able to provide aid to war-torn and distressed countries abroad.
The main features of last year’s economic activity may be summarized as follows:
THE RECORD OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY DURING 1947
Employment during 1947 made a new record, passing the mark of 60 million civilian jobs in June and, even with seasonal dips, averaging about 58 million for the whole year.
This was almost 3 million more than in 1946 and about 10.5 million more than in 1940.
Unemployment was even lower than in 1946, and reached what is probably the practical minimum.
Production measured as total physical output of goods was about 7 percent above 1946 and 76 percent above the 1935–39 average.
A slight drop in agricultural production was more than offset by larger production in manufacturing, minerals, construction, transportation, and public utilities.
The first Economic Report set up as an objective for 1947 a total output of goods and services about 5 percent above 1946.
This goal was not quite reached.
The increased output of goods was partly offset by a decline in services.
Productivity per man-hour increased slightly over 1946.
In manufacturing, production increased somewhat more than numbers employed.
Output of the average farm worker declined somewhat because of bad weather conditions but remained far above prewar levels.
Consumer income after taxes reached a new high in 1947.
It was running at the annual rate of $1,264 per capita in the last quarter of 1947, compared with a rate of $1,074 in the first quarter of 1946.
However, the rapid rise in prices caused the purchasing power of the consumer’s dollar income to decline by nearly 8 percent during the same period.
This did most injury to people with low incomes and moderate fixed incomes.
Total spending for consumption was maintained by reduction in the rate of current saving, drawing on past savings, and the rise of consumer credit to a new peak of 13.3 billion dollars at the end of 1947.
Business investment and income throughout 1947 remained consistently above the level of any previous year.
Investment in plant, equipment, and increased inventories amounted to over 25 billion dollars contrasted with 21 billion dollars in 1946.
Some part of this increase reflected higher prices.
Dividend payments reached a new high although corporations retained five-eighths of their profits after taxes to plow back into the business.
Retained corporate earnings were double those of the war years and four times those of 1929.
Flotation of securities, mostly of fixed interest types, provided 4 billion dollars of new capital as against 3.3 billion in 1946.
Commercial bank loans to business increased about 4.2 billion dollars in 1947, with credit expanding so rapidly in the last half year as to cause grave concern as to its inflationary effect.
Housing units completed in 1947 were nearly double the number in 1946, but high costs raised the question whether this rate could be continued.
Exports of goods and services ran at the annual rate of 20 billion dollars in the early part of the year but declined later.
Imports were much less than exports resulting in an export surplus of more than 11 billion dollars for the year.
The ability of foreign countries to finance imports declined in the latter part of the year and the future of our international balance will depend in considerable measure on the size of Government aid and private credits extended.
Government expenditures were reduced to 41.3 billion dollars in the calendar year 1947, leaving a balance of cash receipts of 5.6 billion dollars which was used primarily to reduce bank holdings of Federal debt.
This was a counterinflationary factor during a year of mounting inflation.
The Nation’s Economic Budget for the second half of 1947 indicates a gross national production at an annual rate of 237 billion dollars, contrasted with about 204 billion for 1946.
Investment for construction, equipment, and inventories increased by 24 percent over 1946, and net foreign investments increased by 83 percent, while consumer expenditures increased by only 14 percent.
The increase in consumer expenditures was 3.5 billion dollars more than the increase in their incomes.
The continuance of such a relationship would not enable consumers to absorb, with their current incomes, the output of a maximum employment economy when the extraordinary volume of business reequipment, net exports, and the use of credit level off at more permanently sustainable rates.
The relationships within the Nation’s Economic Budget permitted maximum employment and high production through 1947 but did not include all the adjustments required for permanent prosperity and growth.
The maintenance and stabilization of such a high level of production and consumption will require proper adjustment among money, price, and income relationships.
While changes in price and income relationships during the past year have not disrupted activity in any serious way as yet, they have brought us progressively into a more unstable situation.
As we enter the new year, the American people are keenly aware that inflation is the dominant problem in our economic affairs.
PRICES, WAGES, PROFITS, AND INFLATION IN 1947
At the time of the first Economic Report a year ago, I warned against the danger of advancing prices, which would undermine our structure of national prosperity.
I strongly urged businessmen to bring prices into line with the requirements of a stabilized economy.
I called upon workers to limit their demands for wage increases to those situations where wages were substandard or where wage increases would not necessitate higher prices.
I called for the holding of public works down to the minimum of necessity and called upon procurement agencies to avoid practices that would stimulate price increases.
Prices in the first quarter of 1947 continued the upward trend of the last quarter of 1946.
In its first-quarter review to me, the Council of Economic Advisers stressed the fact that the faster rate at which prices were beginning to move up constituted a serious danger.
During the following weeks, I emphasized in several public statements the need for all groups in the business world to adopt policies and follow practices which would halt this inflationary trend.
There then followed several months of a remarkably stable price level.
One cannot say how far this was due to the voluntary action of the many businessmen who deliberately withheld price advances and in a few cases reduced prices, or to what extent the cessation of price increases was the result of the widespread resistance of retail merchants to higher wholesale prices or was due to the spread of a generally more cautious attitude among businessmen and individual consumers.
Although the upward movement of prices had apparently been checked when I presented my Midyear Economic Report, I warned that there were strong new inflationary forces.
I endeavored again to impress businessmen with the great need for price stability and I again asked labor to refrain from demands for such wage increases as would require price advances.
Unfortunately, even as the Midyear Report was presented, unfavorable developments in agriculture, industry, and the international situation started changes in incomes and prices quite different from those recommended in my first Economic Report.
Businessmen were in the main finding it easy to pass added costs on in price advances of like or greater amount.
Since June, wholesale prices have risen at an annual rate of 20 percent and consumer prices at an annual rate of about 12 percent.
Retail food prices have risen at an annual rate of about 15 percent.
Rent, since the modification of rent control, has been rising at an annual rate of about 13 percent.
At the wholesale level, textiles during the second half of 1947 were rising at an annual rate of 12 percent, fuel and lighting 36 percent, and building materials 18 percent.
Wages, too, were moving up.
Wage earners had in the first half of the year sought to obtain increases in rates that would maintain their takehome pay at or near the wartime level and thus enable them to buy the enlarged product of goods and services that a high-production peacetime economy could turn out.
Wage advances during 1947 kept up generally with the cost of living trend during the year but did not gain the ground lost when price increases exceeded wage increases in 1946.
The renewed rise in the cost of living during the second half of 1947 brought demands for further wage increases.
At the end of the year there was a continuing prospect of a fruitless and dangerous spiraling of prices and wages.
Profits were substantially above the 1946 level, and remained high through the year as increased costs were covered, and in many cases exceeded, by higher prices.
Corporate profits before taxes rose to 28 billion dollars, contrasted with 21 billion in 1946, and profits after taxes rose to 17 billion dollars, compared with 12.5 billion in 1946.
Corporate earnings after taxes represented about 9.5 percent on net worth, and 5.5 percent on sales.
Unincorporated non-farm enterprises earned 23.5 billion dollars before taxes, an increase of 2,5 billion.
Total business income before taxes increased by 22 percent during the year.
Net farm income before taxes rose from 15.2 billion dollars in 1946 to 18.3 billion in 1947.
The record of prices, wages and profits during 1947 shows how they fed upon one another in a developing process of inflation.
In spite of the heartening production record of the year, this inflationary trend was profoundly disturbing.
It not only produced great inequities among our people, but also created the danger of a serious setback.
The purposes of the Employment Act are beginning to meet their first real test.
Unless we as a nation show an ability to impose restraints upon ourselves and to utilize the machinery of our representative government to devise well-considered regulatory measures, we stand in great danger that runaway prices, overextended credit, and unbalanced developments will lead to an economic recession.
We cannot be sure that such a recession would not be severe and recovery slow and painful.
OBJECTIVES FOR 1948
The first objective for 1948 must be to halt the inflationary trend.
On November 17, I recommended to the Congress a ten-point program for this purpose.
Every point in that program is essential.
The nature of the inflation from which we are suffering arises in part from the total excess of buying power over the available supply of goods and in part from relative scarcities at strategic points in the economy which give impetus to particular price-wage spirals.
To deal with these two phases of inflation, my ten-point program divides into three main parts.
First, it proposes appropriate restraints upon business credit and consumer credit and commodity speculation.
Second, to deal with the scarcities at strategic spots in the economy, it calls for authority to allocate to their most efficient and necessary uses those scarce commodities and services which enter basically into the cost of living or industrial production.
And third, it calls for the extension and strengthening of rent control, and for authority to impose rationing and price control on a highly selective basis on items of outstanding importance to industrial production or to the cost of living so that these powers may be used promptly to protect the public if other measures prove inadequate.
As I have made clear in a statement on December 29, the three points in my ten-point program which were enacted in the special session of the Congress are necessary but insufficient.
The other seven points are needed, needed badly, and needed promptly.
This program, which the situation requires, does not lessen the need for voluntary restraint.
This applies both to those who price goods and those who buy goods.
No program undertaken by the Government can succeed unless it is accompanied by public cooperation based upon a realization of common dangers and common objectives.
Taxes at present are providing revenues substantially larger than expenditures.
It is important to maintain this favorable balance as long as the inflationary trend continues.
However, certain adjustments need to be made immediately in order to protect those in the lower income groups hit hardest by inflation.
Our second main objective for 1948 should be to maintain maximum employment, achieve maximum production, and adjust the price-income structure so as to stop the inflationary spiral without production cutbacks or extensive unemployment.
More production this year will help in combatting inflation, but there is no possibility of enough additional production this year to overcome inflation without other measures.
In fact, if these other measures are not undertaken, inflation may cause such disruption of our economy as to drive production and employment downward.
With healthy adjustments in our economy achieved during the year, our employment objective should be to absorb in useful work the net increase of 700,000 additional people in the labor force.
This would mean an average of nearly 59 million jobs for the year as a whole, contrasted with about 58 million as the year’s average for 1947.
Our objective for production should be to increase the total output of goods and services by some 3 percent above 1947.
Our third main objective for 1948 should be to establish firmer foundations for the long-range growth and prosperity of our economy in the years ahead.
LONG-RANGE OBJECTIVES
The economic growth and stability of the United States cannot be achieved by dealing with problems merely from day to day.
We must have a sufficiently long-time perspective to do also those things which require some time for their planning and organization.
Our total annual national production has increased since 1939 by 53 percent.
We cannot expect such rapid advance within the next 10 years because we are now at a fuller use of our resources than we were in 1939.
Yet we should within 10 years be able to increase our annual national output by 35 percent.
Progress at this rate would bring the per capita real income of our people to 27 percent above the level of 1947 and 80 percent above the level of 1937.
But our record of periodic depressions in the past warns us that we cannot have stabilized prosperity at this rate of progress without carefully considered and well-directed efforts.
The Nation’s long-range economic programs should be geared to three major purposes:
conserving and developing our natural resources and capital equipment,
enabling our human resources to become fully productive and thus provide richer and more satisfying lives, and
improving our economic institutions and practices so as to utilize free enterprise and representative government effectively toward maximum production and sustained general prosperity.
Development of natural resources and capital equipment
Development of natural resources in land, water power, minerals, and forests requires that we make up as soon as possible for the lapses in many of these efforts during the pressures of war and postwar reconversion.
Wise conservation and development efforts are now all the more needed because in many respects these resources were subjected to excessive drains to supply wartime production.
One-half of the Nation’s crop and pasture land needs to be put under improved soil management.
Programs for flood control and power need to be expanded.
Further construction of multipurpose dams and related facilities is desirable.
Our sustained yield of saw timber should be doubled.
With regard to minerals for industrial and strategic purposes, we need increased emphasis upon research, development of substitutes, and importation and stockpiling.
There are areas of the country which, for a combination of reasons, have been underdeveloped or retarded economically.
We must push regional development through improved agricultural methods and land use, further industrial expansion and diversification, and lifting the levels of health and education.
All of our resource development activities will require the alert interest of the people, vigorous private enterprise, and a wise pooling of the efforts of Federal, State, and local governments.
Our business plant and equipment need to be expanded to sustain continuous maximum employment and production.
We shall require more capacity in steel, petroleum, coke, electricity, and other industries.
We can rely mainly upon business for this expansion, if business adjusts its plans to an economy of continuous maximum production instead of adjusting its plans to an economy of recurrent low resource utilization.
Government has the responsibility of providing favorable conditions for adequate and well-balanced private investment in productive facilities, with prudent use of Government initiative when private resources lag.
Both private and public policy must, however, impose restraints on boom-time overdevelopment and overcapitalization.
In transportation,
at least 45 percent of our highways leading into cities need to be rebuilt within 10 years,
financial aid to airlines should be continued,
railroad consolidation should be carried out with increasing vigor, and
national policies should recognize the need for protecting the credit of the railroads.
Urban redevelopment and housing afford an immense challenge.
The blight and deterioration of our cities have created grave problems of municipal taxation and management, and have damped the rate of investment in rebuilding.
This problem is closely related to the inadequacy and instability of house production.
As a start toward the objective of a decent standard of American housing within 10 years and for the release of investment opportunities over a decade of as much as 75 billion dollars—mostly private funds—in urban redevelopment, there should be prompt enactment of comprehensive housing and urban redevelopment legislation.
Development of human resources and productivity
Within 10 years, maximum employment will mean 64 million jobs or more.
To raise the individual to the highest practical level of productivity, and to provide an outlet for the increasing part of the labor force which technological changes may displace from the mass-production industries or from agriculture, we need improved services in education, health, and social security.
For education, the first step, which should not be deferred, is to provide Federal aid for elementary and secondary education to help remedy the deplorable shortages and the maldistribution of school facilities and teachers.
At present, our ten poorest States are spending about $64 annually for each school child, while our ten wealthiest States are spending about $177.
Federal aid should be given not only to this educational effort but also to research work both in basic principles of natural and social science and in their practical application.
Our health standards are not being met because of the inability of millions of families to purchase adequate medical care with their incomes, and also because of the great disparities in the resources of different areas of the country available for investment in hospitals and other health services.
We need a comprehensive national health program, including prepaid health insurance and aid to hospitals and health centers.
Social security, both in its unemployment insurance and its old-age insurance aspects, should be increased and its coverage should be made more general.
Development of institutions and practices for a high-production economy
We have learned from experience that the capacity to produce does not alone assure continuous maximum employment.
The distribution of purchasing power determines whether there will be enough funds available to provide adequate investment for maximum production and enough buying power to absorb the output.
Industrial price-wage-profit policies, arrived at without compulsion in a free, competitive economy, play an important part in preserving or destroying balance in our economy.
In those areas where businessmen and workers make conscious decisions about prices, wages, and profits, we must seek through education and understanding to adjust these decisions ever more closely to the broad needs of the whole economy.
At the same time, the adaptability of the economy to changing circumstances requires the maintenance of active competition which, through amendment and improved enforcement of the antitrust laws, must be preserved where it exists and revived where it has languished.
Collusive monopolistic practices must be eradicated and the trend toward concentration of economic power reversed.
For balanced expansion, our economy requires a larger flow of income to consumers.
Comparing 1939 with today in dollars of constant purchasing power, annual expenditures for producers’ durable equipment have increased by 170 percent, while annual consumers’ expenditures have increased by only 48 percent.
When the export surplus and business retooling and the use of savings and credit level off or are reduced, we shall need more consumer income to sustain maximum production.
More consumer income must be accompanied by better income distribution.
In 1946, the lowest-income fifth of our families had an average annual income before taxes of only $835.
The second fifth had an average annual income of only about $2,000.
The top fifth had an average annual income of almost $93000.
Agricultural and food policy throughout the decade ahead should be based on the expanding needs of a maximum production economy.
With improvements in the incomes and living standards of wage earners, and with continued concentration upon improving nutrition, our agricultural output should within 10 years reach a level about 10 percent above the present level.
This would mean a crop output about 25 percent, and a livestock output nearly 50 percent, above prewar levels.
Soil conservation activities should be intensified.
Capital investment per farm worker will need to be increased, and there is need for three times as many tractors on farms as before the war.
There are 2 or 3 million farmers with too little land or whose land is too poor or whose equipment is inadequate.
We shall continue to need the farm programs that have been developed to advise farmers in adjusting their production patterns to the changing patterns of demand, and to offset in some degree the special hazards affecting their industry through crop insurance and price support for major farm commodities.
Tax policy for the long run should have two major elements:
first, a level of revenue above expenditures in all except depression years which will permit systematic reduction of the public debt; and,
second, a tax structure which will promote stabilized prosperity through adjustment of particular taxes to stimulate or to check consumer expenditure or business expenditure as circumstances require.
Debt management policies should be so conducted that appropriate restraints on bank credit can be applied without abandoning or impairing the sound principle of Government price support of bonds which the people have bought as an expression of their faith in the Government’s financial security.
Our international economic relations should be such as to aid in the restoration of Europe under the European Recovery Program.
We are now seeking, and should seek always, to negotiate with other nations better standards for the conduct of world trade so that each country may be facilitated in producing the things which it can produce best and buying the things which can be produced more economically elsewhere.
In a framework of increasing world prosperity, our country can move forward most confidently to meet the problems of our domestic economy.
