To the Congress of the United States:
I regard achievement of the full potential of our resources—physical, human, and otherwise—to be the highest purpose of governmental policies next to the protection of those rights we regard as inalienable.
I cited this as my philosophy in my first Economic Report in January 1964.
I reaffirm it today.
In the past 5 years, this Nation has made great strides toward realizing the full potential of our resources.
Through fuller use and steady growth of our productive potential, our real output has risen nearly 30 percent.
Most important of all are our human resources.
Today the vast majority of our workers enjoy productive and rewarding employment opportunities.
For those who lack skills, we have made pioneering efforts in training.
We have improved education for the young to enhance their productivity and their wisdom as citizens of a great democracy.
Our capital resources—plant and equipment—are being used intensively and have been continually expanded and modernized by a confident business community.
This has all been accomplished in an environment that preserved—indeed, enlarged—the traditional freedom of our economic system.
In today’s prosperous economy, our people have more freedom of choice—among jobs, consumer goods and services, types of investments, places to live, and ways to enjoy leisure.
I look upon the steady and strong growth of employment and production as our greatest economic success.
In recent years, prosperity has become the normal state of the American economy.
But it must not be taken for granted.
It must be protected and extended
by adopting sound and prudent policies for this year and
by improving procedures for fiscal and monetary policymaking to meet our needs for the long run.
I shall discuss these tasks in this Report.
I shall also consider how we might deal with some of our key unsolved economic problems.
•
We must find a way of combining our prosperity with price stability.
Reconciling these two objectives is the biggest remaining over-all economic challenge facing the Nation.
•
We must more fully secure the foundations of the world monetary system and of our own balance of payments.
The international monetary system has undergone important evolutionary improvements, but we must seek more effective ways of coping with the stresses that can still develop.
•
We must fulfill our many unmet public needs such as good education, efficient transportation, clean air, and pure water.
Quality as well as quantity is the key to a better life.
•
We must share more equitably the fruits of prosperity among all our citizens.
A Nation as prosperous as ours can afford to open the doors of opportunity to all.
Indeed, it cannot afford to leave any citizen in poverty.
The achievements we have made and the lessons we have learned point the way for further progress.
THE RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT
The Nation is now in its 95th month of continuous economic advance.
Both in strength and length, this prosperity is without parallel in our history.
We have steered clear of the business-cycle recessions which for generations derailed us repeatedly from the path of growth and progress.
This record demonstrates the vitality of a free economy and its capacity for steady growth.
No longer do we view our economic life as a relentless tide of ups and downs.
No longer do we fear that automation and technical progress will rob workers of jobs rather than help us to achieve greater abundance.
No longer do we consider poverty and unemployment permanent landmarks on our economic scene.
CONTRIBUTION OF POLICY
Our progress did not just happen.
It was created by American labor and business in effective partnership with the Government.
Ever since the historic passage of the Employment Act in 1946, economic policies have responded to the fire alarm of recession and boom.
In the 1960’s, we have adopted a new strategy aimed at fire prevention—sustaining prosperity and heading off recession or serious inflation before they could take hold.
•
In 1964 and 1965, tax reductions unleashed the vigor of private demand and brought the economy a giant step toward its full potential.
•
In 1966 and 1967, restrictive monetary and fiscal policies offset the strains of added defense spending.
The adjustment was far from ideal, however, because of the delay in increasing taxes to pay the bills for the defense buildup and for continuing urgent civilian programs.
•
In 1968, our Nation’s finances were finally adjusted to the needs of a defense emergency.
The Revenue and Expenditure Control Act strengthened the foundation of prosperity.
GAINS IN 5 YEARS
Aided by these policies in the past 5 years, the Nation’s total output of goods and services—our gross national product—has increased by more than $190 billion, after correcting for price changes.
This is as large as the gain of the previous 11 years.
The prosperity of the last 5 years has been accompanied by benefits that extend into every corner of our national life
more than 8 1/2 million additional workers found jobs,
over-all unemployment declined from 5.7 percent of our labor force to 3.3 percent,
unemployment of nonwhite adult males dropped particularly dramatically, from 9.7 percent to 3.4 percent,
the number of persons in poverty declined by about 12 1/2 million—progress greater than in the entire preceding 13 years,
the average income of Americans (after taxes and after correction for price rises) increased by $535—more than one-fifth and again more than in the previous 13 years combined,
corporate profits rose by about 50 percent,
wages and salaries also went up by 50 percent,
net income per farm advanced 36 percent,
the net financial assets of American families increased $460 billion—more than 50 percent, and
Federal revenues grew by $70 billion, helping to finance key social advances.
Meanwhile, a solid foundation has been built for continued growth in the years ahead.
•
Through Investment in Plant and Equipment.
In the last 5 years, the stock of capital equipment has grown by nearly a third.
Only 5 percent of manufacturing corporations report that their capacity is in excess of currently foreseen needs.
•
Through Investment in Manpower.
More than a million Americans have acquired skills in special training institutions or on the job—as a result of new Federal efforts.
•
Through Investment in Education.
College enrollment has risen by 2 1/4 million since 1963.
Expenditures on all public education have increased at an average of 10 percent a year;
Federal grants have almost quadrupled.
•
Through Investment in Our Neighborhoods.
Our urban centers are beginning to be restored as decent places to live and initial steps have been taken to help ensure construction of 26 million new or rehabilitated housing units by 1978.
DEVELOPMENTS IN 1968
Our economy had an exceptionally big year in 1968.
•
Our gross national product increased by $71 billion to $861 billion.
Adjusted for price increases, the gain was 5 percent.
•
Payroll employment rose by more than two million persons.
•
Unemployment fell by 160,000.
•
The after-tax real income of the average person increased by 3 percent.
•
An estimated four million Americans escaped from poverty, the largest exodus ever recorded in a single year.
•
Our balance-of-payments results were the best in 11 years.
In some ways, 1968 was too big a year.
Even our amazingly productive economy could not meet all the demands placed upon it.
Nearly half of the extra dollars spent in our markets added to prices rather than to production.
The price-wage spiral turned rapidly.
•
Consumer prices rose by 4 percent and wholesale prices by 2 1/2 percent.
•
Both union and nonunion wages increased about 7 percent—responding to higher costs of living and causing higher costs of production.
•
Some of the extra demands for goods were met out of foreign production, and imports soared 22 percent.
The main source of the overheating was the excessive and inappropriate stimulus of the Federal budget in late 1967 and the first half of 1968.
In January 1967, I pointed to the need for a tax increase.
In the summer, when the upsurge was even more clearly foreseen, I urged immediate enactment of a 10-percent income tax surcharge.
The subsequent delay in enactment resulted in a massive budget deficit of $25 billion for fiscal year 1968, which
accelerated the economy beyond safe speed limits,
weakened confidence in the dollar abroad, and
placed a heavy burden on credit markets at home, pushing interest rates sharply higher.
Ultimate passage of the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968 at midyear brought a much needed swing to fiscal restraint.
The budget now shows a surplus of $2.3 billion for fiscal 1969.
Because of both greater revenues and reduced expenditures, this picture has changed dramatically since last January when we estimated a deficit of $8 billion.
Just as the overly stimulative effects of the huge budget deficit of fiscal 1968 were unmistakable, so there can scarcely be doubt that the reverse swing—of even larger size—will improve balance in our economy.
But just as inappropriate fiscal stimulus took a while to cause obvious problems, so needed fiscal restraint is taking time to work its full beneficial effects on the economy.
By the time the surcharge was enacted, the forces of boom and inflation had developed great momentum.
Our economy continued to advance too rapidly throughout 1968—but growth did slow from a hectic 6 1/2 percent rate early in the year to about 4 percent at yearend.
The budget is now in harmony with the needs of the economy, and its welcome effects are gradually emerging.
THE PROGRAM FOR 1969
The challenge to fiscal and monetary policies this year is difficult indeed.
Enough restraint must be provided to permit a cooling off of the economy and a waning of inflationary forces.
But the restraint must also be tempered to ensure continued economic growth.
We must adopt a carefully balanced program that curbs inflation and preserves prosperity.
THE BUDGET
My final budget is designed to meet this demanding assignment.
It is a tight and prudent program for fiscal 1970.
•
It holds total Federal expenditures within the bounds of available revenues, yielding a surplus of $3.4 billion.
•
It finances our continued military efforts in Vietnam while we strive to bring about peace.
•
It provides funds for our continuing national campaign against poverty, injustice, and inequality.
•
It limits increases in expenditures to programs of highest priority: the encouraging JOBS program and other manpower training, Model Cities and key housing programs, law enforcement, and education.
•
It trims lower priority programs wherever possible.
The budget calls for the extension of the income tax surcharge at its current rate of 10 percent for 1 year from July 1, 1969 to June 30, 1970.
My economic and financial advisers unanimously agree that this fiscal restraint is essential to safeguard the purchasing power of the dollar and its strength throughout the world.
Indeed, the need for continued fiscal restraint is agreed upon by all informed opinion in both of our political parties.
In today’s economic and military environment, an immediate lowering of taxes would be irresponsible.
The American people would be poorly served by a small short-run gain that would endanger their enormous long-term stake in a steady and stable prosperity.
I hope and I believe that Members of the Congress of both parties will support timely action on taxes to continue on the course of fiscal responsibility which we have worked together to achieve.
I asked for the surcharge as a temporary measure and that is the way I regard it.
My proposal for a 1-year extension preserves the option of the new Administration and the Congress to eliminate the surcharge more rapidly if our quest for peace is successful in the near future.
It is my conviction that the surcharge should be removed just as soon as that can be done without jeopardizing our economic health, our national security, our most urgent domestic programs, or international confidence in the dollar.
Clearly, that time has not yet arrived.
The extended surcharge will continue to take 1 percent of the income of the average American—less than half of the tax cut he received in 1964–65.
In return, he will receive improved protection against the ravages of inflation, world financial crisis, and neglect or mismanagement of our priorities.
It is the best investment in responsible fiscal management that the United States can make in 1969.
Including this budget, I have been responsible for 6 years of fiscal planning.
From fiscal 1965 to fiscal 1970, the Federal Government will have spent $969 billion on programs and received $936 billion in revenues.
The total deficit for that period amounts to $33 1/2 billion.
The bulk of that total deficit occurred in fiscal 1968, when action on taxes was long delayed.
By comparison, these six budgets
provided $35 billion of net tax reductions, even allowing for higher social security taxes, and
carried $109 billion of outlays to cover the special costs of the war in Vietnam.
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
With this budget and appropriate monetary policy, our gross national product for 1969 should rise about $60 billion.
•
Increased expenditures on new plant and equipment will help expand and modernize our productive capacity.
•
State and local governments will continue to increase their spending rapidly to meet public needs.
But Federal purchases will rise little.
•
Consumer spending and homebuilding activity should advance less than last year.
•
The over-all gains will not and should not be as large as those in 1968, but they will still make for a highly prosperous year.
•
For the fourth straight year, unemployment should be less than 4 percent of the labor force.
Because fiscal policy is soundly planned, monetary policy should not be overburdened.
It will need to support firmly the objective of moderating economic expansion.
But homebuilding and other credit-sensitive areas need not be subjected to the sharp and uneven pressures of a credit squeeze.
Monetary policy should be flexible and prepared to lessen restraint as the economy cools off.
As pressures of demand moderate, our trade performance in world markets should improve.
We should also see a gradually improving trend in prices and costs, although the wage-price spiral will continue to be troublesome.
TOWARD PRICE-COST STABILITY
The immediate task in 1969 is to make a decisive step toward price stability.
This will be only the beginning of the journey.
We cannot hope to reach in a single year the goal that has eluded every industrial country for generations—that of combining high employment with stable prices.
There is no simple nor single formula for success.
But this combination can and must be achieved—by the United States and within the next several years.
Now that we have learned to sustain prosperity, we can surely not allow inflation to erode or erase that victory.
THE ROADS TO AVOID
We stand at a critical turning point for national policy.
We can meet the challenge, or we can try to evade it.
Price stability could be restored unwisely by an overdose of fiscal and monetary restraint.
This has been done before, and it would work again.
But such a course would mean stumbling into recession and slack, losing precious billions of dollars of output, suffering rising unemployment, with growing distress and unrest.
It would be a prescription for social disaster as well as for unconscionable waste.
Or we could conceivably travel the route to mandatory controls on prices and wages.
But the vital guiding mechanism of a free economy is lost when the Government fixes prices and wages.
We did not impose such regulations on our businessmen and our workers during the recent years of military buildup and hostilities.
We surely must not turn down this path—a dead end for economic freedom and progress.
Or we could throw up our hands and allow the price-wage spiral to turn faster and faster.
This counsel of despair would eventually undermine our prosperity and our financial system—wrecking the strong international position of the dollar and imposing unjust burdens on millions of our citizens.
THE ROADS TO FOLLOW
Price stability in a prosperous economy must be pursued by a coordinated program involving a wide range of actions.
The fiscal and monetary program I outlined earlier is our first line of defense against inflation.
The Nation has surely learned that inflation will emerge unless responsible budget and credit policies keep demand within the bounds of the economy’s productive capacity.
Even then, advances in prices and wages at high employment can prove troublesome.
No free economy can escape these tendencies entirely.
But it can keep them from developing when unemployment is too high, and it can moderate the pressures that do emerge.
To do so effectively requires reinforcing other important measures to reinforce fiscal and monetary policies.
Productivity and Efficiency
First, although the productive efficiency of our industries and of our workers is already the envy of the world, we must keep striving for further improvements.
Productivity can be raised even more rapidly and manpower can be employed more effectively through many methods in which Government can lend a hand—
by training programs that better match skills to job requirements,
by developing the potential of the disadvantaged,
by using the wasted abilities of those who are out of work seasonally or intermittently,
by providing better information about job opportunities, and
by encouraging research and investment in better technology.
Government, business, and labor can work together to improve industrial efficiency.
We can strengthen our dedication to the competitive principles and practices that have made American industry preeminent.
Impediments to efficiency must be identified and tackled, industry by industry, wherever they exist—as they do particularly in medical care and construction.
The Government should look at its own programs and policies to ensure that they do not add an unnecessary penny to the costs of production.
To fulfill this goal, public policies must be reviewed continually in many areas—procurement, regulation, international trade, commodity programs, and research and development.
Voluntary Cooperation
Second, both in their own interest and in the public interest, business and labor should exercise the utmost restraint in price and wage decisions.
It is understandable that, with living costs rising sharply, labor cannot now accept wage agreements limited to the rise in productivity.
It is also understandable that, with production costs increasing, business cannot now hold prices entirely stable.
But the process of deceleration must take hold for both prices and wages.
The demands for incomes by business and labor combined must be brought more closely into line with the amount of real income the economy can generate.
A decisive step toward price stability in 1969 requires labor and business to accept some mutual sacrifices in the short run to preserve their enormous long-term interest in prosperity and a stable value of the dollar.
In recent years, business, labor, and Government have been discussing the big economic issues—sometimes debating, but often agreeing.
The dialogue should go forward and should explore new forms of labor-management cooperation to ensure greater fulfillment of common interests.
A year ago, I established the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability to coordinate efforts within the Administration to help improve efficiency, enlist voluntary restraint, and contribute to public education and discussion on the wage-price problem.
In its recent Report, the Committee made many important recommendations which deserve the most serious consideration.
The work of the Committee has proved its value, and should be continued in some appropriate form.
The stakes are enormous in our efforts to combine high employment and price stability.
We can sacrifice neither goal.
The challenge can be met if we have the will.
REINFORCING THE FISCAL-MONETARY FRAMEWORK
The unparalleled economic expansion of the past 8 years testifies to the accomplishments of our fiscal and monetary policies.
Yet the blemishes on that record show plainly that further improvements are needed.
BUDGET POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
The budget is the keystone of Federal Government operations.
It is a plan developed within the Executive Branch and a recommended program for action by the Congress.
It is a blueprint for fiscal and economic policy.
In my many years in Washington, I have worked intensively on the budget on both the legislative and executive sides.
I know the difficulties of
coordinating a host of appropriation requests into a total program that accurately reflects national priorities,
making the dollar sum of the parts equal a whole that remains within prudent bounds, and
ensuring that decisions on tax revenues go hand in hand with those on expenditures.
The Executive Branch coordinates its budgetary decisions through the Bureau of the Budget, with extensive cooperation from the Department of the Treasury and the Council of Economic Advisers.
The Congress has no parallel process.
I urge the Congress to review its procedures for acting on the annual budget and to consider ways that may improve the coordination of decisions among Federal programs and on Federal revenues in relation to expenditures.
My experience has thoroughly convinced me of the fundamental wisdom of our system of checks and balances.
The system works well because both the President and the Congress subject their own operations continually to careful scrutiny and review in light of experience.
Costly delays in enacting recent tax legislation demonstrate the need for a review of procedures in this area.
Congress should ask: How can a prompt response to a Presidential request for tax action be assured?
When such a recommendation takes a simple form (like the current income tax surcharge) and when it is made to head off a threat to prosperity, the Nation is entitled to a prompt verdict.
To provide the fiscal flexibility needed in our modern economy, the Congress might be willing to give the President discretionary authority to initiate limited changes in tax rates, subject to Congressional veto.
I believe that the President should have such authority.
Alternatively, the Congress might choose to establish its own rules for ensuring a prompt vote—up or down—on a Presidential request for tax action.
The Nation should never again be subjected to the threat of fiscal stalemate.
MONETARY POLICY
Our institutions allow monetary policy to adjust promptly and smoothly, and the value of this flexibility has become evident.
When fiscal action has been delayed, monetary policy has been able to continue the battle against inflation.
But tight credit, soaring interest rates, pressures on homebuilding, and nervous financial markets are the unhappy results of an overburdened monetary policy.
Greater fiscal flexibility would help to ensure that monetary policy is not asked to carry an undue share of the load in restraining—or stimulating—the economy.
The Administration and the Federal Reserve have learned to work together closely and to coordinate effectively, while preserving the appropriate independence of the Federal Reserve within the Government.
Our monetary institutions are working well, and I see a need for only a few reforms to enhance their effectiveness.
•
The term of Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board should be appropriately geared to that of the President to provide further assurance of harmonious policy coordination.
•
The rigid requirement that no more than a single member of the Federal Reserve Board may be appointed from any one Federal Reserve District should be removed so that the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, may choose the very best talent for the Board.
•
The Congress should review procedures for selecting the presidents of the 12 Reserve Banks to determine whether these positions should be subject to the same appointive process that applies to other posts with similarly important responsibilities for national policy.
AFTER VIETNAM
Despite some encouraging signs of progress toward peace, hostilities in Vietnam continue.
In planning our budget, we must assume continuation of the war.
But we must also be ready to adjust to peace whenever that welcome day arrives.
Early in 1967, to ensure our readiness for peace, I established the Cabinet Coordinating Committee on Economic Planning for the End of Vietnam Hostilities.
The Report of that Committee emphasizes the demanding task that will confront fiscal and monetary policies once a secure peace permits demobilization.
The resources freed from war must not—and need not—be squandered in idleness.
Rather, this manpower and material should be promptly enlisted in the service of peaceful progress.
In addition to its immeasurable human benefits, peace will provide an economic dividend to the Nation and to the Federal budget.
But that dividend is dwarfed by the urgent needs of our society.
The Nation will have to weigh the priorities among attractive programs carefully and wisely to take full advantage of this dividend.
High on the list of priorities is the commitment to provide equal and full economic opportunities for all our citizens.
THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY
BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS ADJUSTMENT
Our international accounts were in balance in 1968—for the first time since 1957.
Much of the improvement came from the program I announced in an atmosphere of world financial crisis a year ago.
The contrast today is striking and gratifying.
The excellent results of last year were aided by temporary factors.
Hence, we cannot relax our efforts to achieve fundamental improvement—especially in our disappointing trade performance.
To strengthen our trade surplus and achieve a healthy balance of payments, we must
restore price stability at home,
encourage our farms and factories to become ever more competitive in quality and price so that they can export more,
intensify efforts to secure the removal of barriers to freer trade,
bring more foreign tourists to our shores to enjoy America with us, and
minimize the foreign exchange cost of our military commitments and economic aid overseas.
Our temporary programs to restrain capital outflows worked well in 1968.
American businesses showed remarkable ingenuity and cooperation in pursuing their activities abroad while drastically cutting the drain on the Nation’s balance of payments.
These programs clearly aided in preserving the strength of the dollar.
Capital restraints should never become permanent features of our economy.
They should be ended as soon as possible.
But the war continues and the movement toward noninflationary prosperity has just begun.
We cannot now scrap our defenses against large capital outflows.
For the present, we must
renew the Interest Equalization Tax before it expires on July 31,
maintain the direct investment control program in the more flexible form recently announced, and
continue the Federal Reserve program of voluntary restraint of foreign lending.
To maintain our gains, ever closer international cooperation is needed among the highly interdependent nations of the world.
Countries in deficit must meet their responsibilities.
And countries in surplus must also pursue appropriate policies—striving especially for rapid economic expansion and giving world traders greater access to their markets.
WORLD MONETARY SYSTEM
The international monetary system was strengthened in 1968.
An historic international agreement was reached, creating in the International Monetary Fund a new reserve asset—the Special Drawing Right.
We spent 3 years studying, exploring, and negotiating with our commercial partners in order to reach this agreement.
I eagerly await the day that actual distribution of SDR’s will begin.
They can meet the future needs of the world for international liquidity—in the proper amounts and in a usable form.
I am proud that the United States acted so promptly to ratify this agreement with such overwhelming bipartisan support in the Congress.
Some did not believe that such an agreement was possible, arguing that a rise in the official price of gold was the only way to increase international reserves.
We and our trading partners rejected this futile course;
it would have offered a ransom payment to speculators and would have failed to provide for the orderly growth of reserves.
I have carried out my pledge that the United States would sell gold to official holders of dollars at $35 an ounce.
There is clearly no need to change that price.
Myths about gold die slowly.
But progress can be made—as we have demonstrated.
In 1968, the Congress ended the obsolete gold-backing requirement for our currency.
Another major step in freeing the international monetary system from disturbances by gold speculators was taken in March, when the United States and the other active gold pool countries agreed to cease supplying gold to the private market.
The resulting two-price system for gold is working successfully.
The international economy has made major strides in the past.
But we must recognize the problems that remain.
The financial crises of 1968 stimulated constructive discussion of many proposals for further evolutionary improvements in the international economic system.
These proposals are not an agenda for action in a week or a month or even a year.
The issues posed cannot be resolved in a summit meeting or by a superplan.
But they can be tackled effectively with the same kind of careful study and negotiation that led to the successful SDR plan.
The United States should actively participate in such a procedure in order to strengthen the foundation of the world economy.
TRADE
World trade has continued to expand briskly—virtually unaffected by the sporadic crises in financial markets.
Tariff barriers that once stifled international commerce have been substantially lowered—most notably by the Kennedy Round reductions which began in 1968 and will continue until 1973.
We must reinforce this success by devoting equal energy to the removal of nontariff barriers.
On our part, Congressional action to rescind the American Selling Price provision is essential for achieving reductions of nontariff barriers offered by several of our trading partners.
Other nontariff barriers also need revision.
•
Agriculture has been the stepchild of trade negotiations, and deserves prompt and proper attention.
•
The international rules governing border tax adjustments should be revised so that they no longer give a special advantage to countries that rely heavily on excise and other indirect taxes.
While we work to reduce trade barriers, we must not drop our guard against the advocates of protectionism at home and abroad.
We will never neglect the legitimate concerns of any citizen.
But the only real solutions are ones that improve our economy—not ones that erect new barriers that could provoke retaliation, or insulate producers from the invigorating force of world competition.
To provide the right kind of aid to those seriously hurt by import competition, present provisions for temporary adjustment assistance must be liberalized, as I have repeatedly recommended.
AID
Important economic progress is being made in the world’s less developed countries.
The beginnings of spectacular advances in world agriculture are now clearly evident.
Family planning is gaining widespread support.
The United States can and should help to promote further progress in world agriculture and family planning, and the achievement of more rapid economic growth in the less developed countries.
Only if funds for foreign aid programs are restored to an adequate level can we do our part.
The United States has long supported multilateral assistance as an equitable and efficient means of channeling aid from wealthy to poorer nations.
We must reaffirm this support by promptly authorizing the U.S. contributions to the replenishment of the International Development Association and to the Special Funds of the Asian Development Bank.
KEY AREAS OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY
The bountiful output of the American private enterprise system has made our high standard of living possible.
Yet this same abundance has created a growing need for public action to improve the quality of life in our cities, towns, and countryside.
The Federal Government must continue its partnership with the private sector and with State and local governments to provide better public services.
Increased efforts are needed to
improve the environment by ensuring clean air, pure water, and the conservation of natural resources,
assist in community development and in education,
protect the consumer against unfair practices and unwholesome products,
ensure safe employment conditions, and
provide a more comprehensive social insurance system to protect against the financial impacts of retirement, unemployment, job accidents, and long-term illness of a breadwinner.
QUALITY OF THE ENVIRONMENT
More than ever, Americans realize that purposeful action is required to ensure an environment we can all enjoy.
In the last 5 years, legislation has been enacted to abate air and water pollution and to control the disposal of solid wastes.
Despite progress, many of our rivers still are open sewers, our atmosphere often unfit to breathe, and much of our land littered with discarded junk.
We must
develop new methods for financing water treatment plants,
attack oil pollution of harbors and beaches,
strengthen laws for clean air and solid waste disposal,
stop the ravages of strip mining, and
preserve more parks and wilderness areas.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING
Rapid population growth in our cities and rising living standards have created a backlog of community and housing needs.
Local governments are finding it increasingly difficult to finance essential community facilities—schools, parks, hospitals, and transportation systems.
The Federal Government must develop new ways to help communities raise capital for public facilities.
The capacity of the housing industry must be enlarged and updated to meet the Nation’s goal of adding 26 million decent homes and apartments over the next decade.
To improve our communities and meet our housing needs, I recommend
an independent, federally established, Urban Development Bank to provide low-interest loans to State and local governments,
increased Federal research and development to improve construction technology,
a Federal program to test housing materials and to improve building standards and practices,
the training of more construction workers through federally assisted manpower programs in cooperation with trade unions and contractors, and
an urban mass transportation trust fund, financed by a portion of the automobile excise tax.
EDUCATION
Providing good education is a national responsibility in which the Federal Government must do its part.
Great progress has been made in recent years toward our goal of providing every child all the education he wants and can absorb.
But continued and expanded efforts will be needed.
This Nation must strive to
provide every child with year-round opportunity for preschool education,
offer every teacher assistance for continuing education,
bring the cost of higher education within the means of every qualified student through expanded loans and grants, and
provide funds for higher education adequate to ensure instruction of finest quality.
CONSUMER PROTECTION
The confidence of consumers in the American marketplace is vital for a healthy economy.
In the past 5 years, the Congress has ushered in a new era of consumer protection by enacting 20 major measures in this field.
We have made great strides toward our goals of
ensuring that all products are safe and wholesome,
providing full and fair disclosure in the marketplace, and
eliminating fraud and deception by the few who prey on the unsuspecting, the elderly, and the poor.
To carry on the work so well begun, legislation is needed to
prevent deceptive sales practices by giving new authority to the Federal Trade Commission,
reduce the likelihood of massive electric power failures which can paralyze our cities,
ensure that the small investor shares in the benefits of our thriving mutual fund industry, and
complete the circuit of Federal inspection for foods commonly served at the family dinner table.
WORKER PROTECTION
American workers are the most productive in the world and they have made our high standard of living possible.
They and their families deserve a safe working place and adequate protection against the loss of income from on-the-job accidents, disability, and unemployment.
Safety
The human costs of accidents are immense 14,000 people killed on the job each year, 2.2 million workers injured.
The monetary cost alone is a staggering $5 billion.
Recent tragedies in our factories, mines, and other work places have dramatized once more the need for better safety practices.
Must we wait for tragedy to strike again?
The Congress failed to act last year on an urgently needed Occupational Safety and Health Bill and on the Coal Mine Safety Bill.
We can delay no longer.
This Nation must put an end to this senseless waste from job accidents—through comprehensive legislation that will ensure the best job safety and health practices in all American work places.
Workmen’s Compensation
Workmen’s compensation should ensure that no victim of a job-related accident lacks the funds to pay his medical bills and support his family.
Currently, one employee in five has no workmen’s compensation protection.
Benefit levels are too often tragically low.
The Federal Government should act now to ensure that the States provide adequate workmen’s coverage and benefits.
Disability Insurance
Today disabled workers wait as long as 6 months before receiving benefits—and their disability must be expected to last more than 1 year.
In addition, disabled workers are too often unable to pay for the medical care they need.
To meet these shortcomings, I recommend that
the waiting period for benefits be reduced from 6 to 3 months,
the minimum duration of qualifying disability be reduced to 3 months, and
the totally and permanently disabled be eligible for Medicare.
Unemployment Insurance
Even in the height of prosperity during 1968, two million workers were out of work for a period of 15 weeks or longer.
About a million workers spent at least half the year fruitlessly looking for work.
Congress should strengthen the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance system by
extending coverage to five million more workers,
raising benefit levels,
lengthening payment periods, and
providing special federally financed benefits for the long-term unemployed, with recipients required to accept job training and other employment services under appropriate circumstances.
SOCIAL SECURITY
Social security is one of the oldest and best social programs.
Currently, 25 million people—one out of every eight Americans—receive a social security check every month.
Largely because of social security, two-thirds of the beneficiaries—the elderly, widows, orphans, and the disabled—are above the poverty line.
Yet we need to do more.
I recommend an average increase in benefits of 13 percent, including
a rise of at least 10 percent for every beneficiary,
a 45 percent increase from $55 to $80 for the five million Americans receiving the minimum benefit,
a $100 monthly minimum benefit for those who have contributed to social security for 20 years or more, and
a liberalization of benefits for the elderly who choose to work.
OUR COMMITMENT TO ELIMINATE POVERTY
No achievement gives me greater pride than the advances in the war on poverty.
No social challenge gives me greater concern than the elimination of poverty.
Since the passage of the Economic Opportunity Act, which established the Nation’s commitment to eliminate poverty, the number of poor Americans has been reduced by about 11 million.
Still, 22 million Americans remain poor.
The effective programs of the Office of Economic Opportunity must be preserved and strengthened.
For this purpose, I am recommending a 2-year extension of the Economic Opportunity Act.
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
In recent years, our national prosperity has rapidly expanded job opportunities for the poor.
To maintain progress, we must not retreat from high employment.
The doors to opportunity are bound to be locked to the disadvantaged and to new workers if senior and skilled employees are being laid off.
At the same time, we cannot count on normal economic growth to create as many jobs for the poor as were created when we moved out of a slack economy.
We must therefore increase the emphasis on manpower programs in order to provide effective aid to the disadvantaged.
In 1968, we launched a major new partnership with private industry—the National Alliance of Businessmen.
Job Opportunities in the Business Sector is a promising route for providing jobs and training for the hard-core unemployed.
The JOBS program has reached its initial target 6 months ahead of schedule.
My budget provides for major expansion of this program.
The experience with JOBS encourages us to develop a similar program for employment in the rapidly growing public sector.
EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND NUTRITION
The poor are often handicapped by inferior education, ill health, and inadequate diets.
Federal Government programs have begun to attack these roots of poverty.
Head Start, Follow Through, and Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act help in educating disadvantaged children.
These should ultimately be expanded to meet the needs of all poor children.
Medicaid has a high proportion of poor beneficiaries and should ultimately free the needy from the bonds of inadequate health care.
Good health is essential for a good start in life.
Expectant mothers and infants in poor families should be provided comprehensive health care.
America, blessed with agricultural abundance, should not tolerate hunger among its people.
The Food Stamp program should be expanded and a cooperative Federal-State effort launched to protect all Americans against hunger and malnutrition.
HOUSING
With the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 we set the goal of eliminating all substandard housing in the next decade.
We must back that commitment with the needed resources—financial, technical, and human.
First priority must be given to the needs of the poorest of the poor through the Model Cities program, rent supplements, home ownership, and public housing.
And all families must be assured full and fair access to housing—with no discrimination.
INCOME SUPPORT
No matter how well we succeed in other efforts, cash assistance will be needed by many of the poor—the elderly, the disabled, and some mothers with sole responsibility for the care of young children.
Although such funds do not directly remove the causes of poverty, they sustain life and hope and help prevent poverty from being bequeathed from one generation to the next.
Income support programs need a thorough review.
The public discussion required to illuminate this area is well under way and will benefit from the report of the Commission on Income Maintenance, due at the end of this year.
Americans will soon have to decide how best to help those who cannot earn enough to escape from poverty.
Whatever strategies we choose, the effort to reduce poverty must be redoubled.
Victory in the war on poverty can be won with only a modest share of the Nation’s income gains.
The total shortfall of income below the poverty line amounts to only 1 percent of our gross national product—one-fourth of our normal growth in a single year.
A fully effective antipoverty program would initially cost more than that—but would not be out of range.
Surely Americans will make the investment needed to eliminate poverty.
CONCLUSION
The American economy has been steadily on the march in the 1960’s.
It has shattered all records for progress toward the Employment Act’s goals of “maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.”
It has bestowed great blessings of abundance on the vast majority of Americans in all walks of life.
Economic growth has provided the resources for urgent defense needs and has still permitted a major expansion of civilian production—both public and private.
It has allowed us to send a youngster to Headstart and a man to the moon.
When our economy was less prosperous, many of our social problems were neglected—eclipsed by the struggle of families to make ends meet.
The plight of the poor was fatalistically accepted when the majority of Americans were vulnerable to unemployment and deprivation.
Our needs for improved schools, better cities, and a healthier environment were pushed into the background.
As the average American’s standard of living soared, we could afford to focus on new challenges.
Facing these issues squarely has in itself been a great accomplishment.
We have marshaled our determination to provide a good job, a decent standard of living, quality education, and a pleasing environment for everyone.
We have begun to make progress toward these new aspirations.
But we have only begun.
And because we have so far to go, many of us are impatient.
This feeling is in the great American tradition.
High aspirations and impatience have constantly spurred us to greater achievements.
And they will again.
Our economy will not rest on the laurels of the 1960’s.
We will not relax to count or consolidate our gains.
We will not retreat from the unprecedented prosperity we have achieved.
This Nation will remain on the march.
